Buck did not read the newspapers, or he would have known that trouble was brewing, not alone for himself, but for every tidewater dog, strong of muscle and with warm, long hair, from Puget Sound to San Diego. Because men, groping in the Arctic darkness, had found a yellow metal, and because steamship and transportation companies were booming the find, thousands of men were rushing into the Northland. These men wanted dogs, and the dogs they wanted were heavy dogs, with strong muscles by which to toil, and furry coats to protect them from the frost.

Buck lived at a big house in the sun-kissed Santa Clara Valley. Judge Miller's place, it was called. It stood back from the road, half-hidden among the trees, through which glimpses could be caught of the wide cool veranda that ran around its four sides. The house was approached by graveled driveways which wound about through wide-spreading lawns and under the interlacing boughs of tall poplars. At the rear things were on even a more spacious scale than at the front. There were great stables, where a dozen grooms and boys held forth, rows of vine-clad servants' cottages, an endless and orderly array of outhouses, long grape arbors, green pastures, orchards, and berry patches. Then there was the pumping plant for the artesian well, and the big cement tank where Judge Miler's boys took their morning plunge and kept cool in the hot afternoon.

And over this great demesne Buck ruled. Here he was born, and here he had lived the four years of his life. It was true, there were other dogs. There could not but be other dogs on so vast a place, but they did not count. They came and went, resided in the populous kennels, or lived obscurely in the recesses of the house after the fashion of Toots, the Japanese pug, or Ysabel, the Mexican hairless, strange creatures that rarely put nose out of doors or set foot to ground. On the other hand, there were the fox terriers, a score of them at least, who yelped fearful promises at Toots and Ysabel looking out of the windows at them and protected by a legion of housemaids armed with brooms and mops.

But Buck was neither house dog nor kennel dog. The whole realm was his. He plunged into the swimming tank or went hunting with the Judge's sons; he escorted Mollie and Alice, the Judge's daughters, on long twilight or early morning rambles; on wintry nights he lay at the Judge's feet before the roaring library fire; he carried the Judge's grandsons on his back, or rolled them in the grass, and guarded their footsteps through wild adventures down to the fountain in the stable yard, and even beyond, where the paddocks were, and the berry patches. Among the terriers he stalked imperiously, and Toots and Ysabel he utterly ignored, for he was king-king over all creeping, crawling, flying things of Judge Miller's place, humans included.

His father, Elmo, a huge St. Bernard, had been the Judge's inseparable companion, and Buck bid fair to follow in the way of his father. He was not so large-he weighed only one hundred and forty pounds-for his mother, She, had been a Scotch shepherd dog. Nevertheless, one hundred and forty pounds, to which was added the dignity that comes of good living and universal respect, enabled him to carry himself in right royal fashion. During the four years since his puppyhood he had lived the life of a sated aristocrat; he had a fine pride in himself, was even a trifle egotistical, as country gentlemen sometimes become because of their insular situation. But he had saved himself by not becoming a mere pampered house dog. Hunting and kindred outdoor delights had kept down the fat and hardened his muscles; and to him, as to the cold-tubbing races, the love of water had been a tonic and a health preserver.

And this was the manner of dog Buck was in the fall of 1897, when the Klondike strike dragged men from all the world into the frozen North. But Buck did not read the newspapers, and he did not know that Manuel, one of the gardener's helpers, was an undesirable acquaintance. Manuel had one besetting sin. He loved to play Chinese lottery. Also, in his gambling, he had one besetting weakness-faith in a system; and this made his damnation certain. For to play a system requires money, while the wages of a gardener's helper do not lap over the needs of a wife and numerous progeny.

The Judge was at a meeting of the Raisin Growers' Association, and the boys were busy organizing an athletic club, on the memorable night of Manuel's treachery. No one saw him and Buck go off through the orchard on what Buck imagined was merely a stroll. And with the exception of a solitary man, no one saw them arrive at the little flag station known as College Park. This man talked with Manuel, and money chinked between them.

"You might wrap up the goods before you deliver them," the stranger said gruffly, and Manuel doubled a piece of stout rope around Buck's neck under the collar.

"Twist it, and you'll choke him plenty," said Manuel, and the stranger grunted a ready affirmative.

Buck had accepted the rope with quiet dignity. To be sure, it was an unwonted performance but he had learned to trust in men he knew, and to give them credit for a wisdom that outreached his own. But when the ends of the rope were placed in the stranger's hands, he growled menacingly. He had merely intimated his displeasure, in his pride believing that to intimate was to command. But to his surprise the rope tightened around his neck, shutting off his breath. In a quick rage he sprang at the man, who met him halfway, grappled him close by the throat, and with a deft twist threw him over on his back. Then the rope tightened mercilessly, while Buck struggled in a fury, his tongue lolling out of his mouth and his great chest panting futilely. Never in all his life had he been so vilely treated, and never in all his life had he been so angry. But his strength ebbed, his eyes glazed, and he knew nothing when the train was flagged and the two men threw him into the baggage car.

The next he knew, he was dimly aware that his tongue was hurting and that he was being jolted along in some kind of a conveyance. The hoarse shriek of a locomotive whistling a crossing told him where he was. He had traveled too often with the Judge not to know the sensation of riding in a baggage car. He opened his eyes, and into them came the unbridled anger of a kidnaped king. The man sprang for his throat, but Buck was too quick for him. His jaws closed on the hand, nor did they relax till his senses were choked out of him once more.

"Yep, has fits," the man said, hiding his mangled hand from the baggage man, who had been attracted by the sounds of struggle. "I'm taking him up for the boss to 'Frisco. A crack dog doctor there thinks that he can cure him."

Concerning that night's ride, the man spoke most eloquently for himself, in a little shed back of a saloon on the San Francisco water front.

"All I get is fifty for it," he grumbled, "and I wouldn't do it over for a thousand, cold cash."

His hand was wrapped in a bloody handkerchief, and the right trouser leg was ripped from knee to ankle.

"How much did the other mug get?" the saloon-keeper demanded.

"A hundred," was the reply. "Wouldn't take a sou less, so help me."

"That makes a hundred and fifty," the saloon-keeper calculated, "and he's worth it, or I'm a squarehead."

The kidnaper undid the bloody wrappings and looked at his lacerated hand. "If I don't get hydrophobia"

"It'll be because you was born to hang," laughed the saloon-keeper. "Here, lend me a hand before you pull your freight," he added.

Dazed, suffering intolerable pain from throat and tongue, with the life half throttled out of him, Buck attempted to face his tormentors. But he was thrown down and choked repeatedly, till they succeeded in filing the heavy brass collar from off his neck. Then the rope was removed, and he was flung into a cage-like crate.

There he lay for the remainder of the weary night, nursing his wrath and wounded pride. He could not understand what it all meant. What did they want with him, these strange men? Why were they keeping him pent up in this narrow crate? He did not know why, but he felt oppressed by the vague sense of impending calamity. Several times during the night he sprang to his feet when the shed door rattled open, expecting to see the Judge, or the boys at least. But each time it was the bulging face of the saloon-keeper that peered in at him by the sickly light of a tallow candle. And each time the joyful bark that trembled in Buck's throat was twisted into a savage growl.

But the saloon-keeper let him alone, and in the morning four men entered and picked up the crate. More tormentors, Buck decided, for they were evil-looking creatures, ragged and unkempt; and he stormed and raged at them through the bars. They only laughed and poked sticks at him, which he promptly assailed with his teeth till he realized that was what they wanted. Whereupon he lay down sullenly and allowed the crate to be lifted into a wagon. Then he, and the crate in which he was imprisoned, began a passage through many hands. Clerks in the express office took charge of him; he was carted about in another wagon; a truck carried him, with an assortment of boxes and parcels, upon a ferry steamer; he was trucked off the steamer into a great railway depot, and finally he was deposited in an express car.

For two days and nights this express car was dragged along at the tail of shrieking locomotives; and for two days and nights Buck neither ate nor drank. In his anger he had met the first advances of the express messengers with growls, and they had retaliated by teasing him. When he flung himself against the bars, quivering and frothing, they laughed at him and taunted him. They growled and barked like detestable dogs, mewed, and flapped their arms and crowed. It was all very silly, he knew; but therefore the more outrage to his dignity, and his anger waxed and waxed. He did not mind the hunger so much, but the lack of water caused him severe suffering and fanned his wrath to fever-pitch. For that matter, high-strung and finely sensitive, the ill treatment had flung him into a fever, which was fed by the inflammation of his parched and swollen throat and tongue.

He was glad for one thing: the rope was off his neck. That had given them an unfair advantage; but now that it was off, he would show them. They would never get another rope around his neck. Upon that he was resolved. For two days and nights he neither ate nor drank, and during those two days and nights of torment, he accumulated a fund of wrath that boded ill for whoever first fell foul of him. His eyes turned bloodshot, and he was metamorphosed into a raging fiend. So changed was he that the Judge himself would not have recognized him; and the express messengers breathed with relief when they bundled him off the train at Seattle.

Four men gingerly carried the crate from the wagon into a small, high-walled back yard. A stout man, with a red sweater that sagged generously at the neck, came out and signed the book for the driver. That was the man, Buck divined, the next tormentor, and he hurled himself savagely against the bars. The man smiled grimly, and brought a hatchet and a club.

"You ain't going to take him out now?" the driver asked.

"Sure," the man replied, driving the hatchet into the crate for a pry.

There was an instantaneous scattering of the four men who had carried it in, and from safe perches on top the wall they prepared to watch the performance.

Buck rushed at the splintering wood, sinking his teeth into it, surging and wrestling with it. Wherever the hatchet fell on the outside, he was there on the inside, snarling and growling, as furiously anxious to get out as the man in the red sweater was calmly intent on getting him out.

"Now, you red-eyed devil," he said, when he had made an opening sufficient for the passage of Buck's body. At the same time he dropped the hatchet and shifted the club to his right hand.

And Buck was truly a red-eyed devil, as he drew himself together for the spring, hair bristling, mouth foaming, a mad glitter in his bloodshot eyes. Straight at the man he launched his one hundred and forty pounds of fury, surcharged with the pent passion of two days and nights. In mid-air, just as his jaws were about to close on the man, he received a shock that checked his body and brought his teeth together with an agonizing clip. He whirled over, fetching the ground on his back and side. He had never been struck by a club in his life, and did not understand. With a snarl that was part bark and more scream he was again on his feet and launched into the air. And again the shock came and he was brought crushingly to the ground. This time he was aware that it was the club, but His madness knew no caution. A dozen times he charged, and as often the club broke the charge and smashed him down.

After a particularly fierce blow he crawled to his feet, too dazed to rush. He staggered limply about, the blood flowing from nose and mouth and ears, his beautiful coat sprayed and flecked with bloody slaver. Then the man advanced and deliberately dealt him a frightful blow on the nose. All the pain he had endured was nothing compared with the exquisite agony of this. With a roar that was almost lion-like in its ferocity, he again hurled himself at the man. But the man, shifting the club from right to left, cooly caught him by the under jaw, at the same time wrenching downward and backward. Buck described a complete circle in the air, and half of another, then crashed to the ground on his head and chest.

For the last time he rushed. The man struck the shrewd blow he had purposely withheld for so long, and Buck crumpled up and went down, knocked utterly senseless.

"He's no slouch at dog-breaking, that's what I say," one of the men on the wall cried with enthusiasm.

"Druther break cayuses any day, and twice on Sundays," was the reply of the driver, as he climbed on the wagon and started the horses.

Buck's senses came back to him, but not his strength. He lay where he had fallen, and from there he watched the man in the red sweater.

" `Answers to the name of Buck,' " the man soliloquized, quoting from the saloon-keeper's letter which had announced the consignment of the crate and contents. "Well, Buck, my boy," he went on in a genial voice, "we've had our little ruction, and the best thing we can do is to let it go at that. You've learned your place, and I know mine. Be a good dog and all will go well and the goose hang high. Be a bad dog, and I'll whale the stuffing outa you. Understand?"

As he spoke he fearlessly patted the head he had so mercilessly pounded, and though Buck's hair involuntarily bristled at touch of the hand, he endured it without protest. When the man brought him water, he drank eagerly, and later bolted a generous meal of raw meat, chuck by chunk, from the man's hand.

He was beaten (he knew that); but he was not broken. He saw, once for all, that he stood no chance against a man with a club. He had learned the lesson, and in all his afterlife he never forgot it. That club was a revelation. It was his introduction to the reign of primitive law, and he met the introduction halfway. The facts of life took on a fiercer aspect; and while he faced that aspect uncowed, he faced it with all the latent cunning of his nature aroused. As the days went by, other dogs came, in crates and at the ends of ropes, some docilely, and some raging and roaring as he had come; and, one and all, he watched them pass under the dominion of the man in the red sweater. Again and again, as he looked at each brutal performance, the lesson was driven home to Buck: a man with a club was a lawgiver, a master to be obeyed, though not necessarily conciliated. Of this last Buck was never guilty, though he did see beaten dogs that fawned upon the man, and wagged their tails, and licked his hand. Also he saw one dog, that would neither conciliate nor obey, finally killed in the struggle for mastery.

Now and again men came, strangers, who talked excitedly, wheedlingly, and in all kinds of fashions to the man in the red sweater. And at such times that money passed between them the strangers took one or more of the dogs away with them. Buck wondered where they went, for they never came back; but the fear of the future was strong upon him, and he was glad each time when he was not selected.

Yet his time came, in the end, in the form of a little weazened man who spat broken English and many strange and uncouth exclamations which Buck could not understand.

"Sacredam!" he cried, when his eyes lit upon Buck. "Dat one dam bully dog! Eh? How much?"

"Three hundred, and a present at that," was the prompt reply of the man in the red sweater. "And seeing it's government money, you ain't got no kick coming, eh, Perrault?"

Perrault grinned. Considering that the price of dogs had been boomed skyward by the unwonted demand, it was not an unfair sum for so fine an animal. The Canadian Government would be no loser, nor would its dispatches travel the slower. Perrault knew dogs, when he looked at Buck he knew that he was one in a thousand-"One in ten thousand," he commented mentally.

Buck saw money pass between them, and was not surprised when Curly, a good-natured Newfoundland, and he were led away by the little weazened man. That was the last he saw of the man in the red sweater, and as Curly and he looked at receding Seattle from the deck of the Narwhal, it was the last he saw of the warm Southland. Curly and he were taken below by Perrault and turned over to a black-faced giant called Francois. Perrault was a French Canadian, and swarthy; but Francois was a French Canadian half-breed, and twice as swarthy. They were a new kind of men to Buck (of which he was destined to see many more), and while he developed no affection for them, he none the less grew honestly to respect them. He speedily learned that Perrault and Francois were fair men, calm and impartial in administering justice, and too wise in the way of dogs to be fooled by dogs.

In the 'tween-decks of the Narwhal, Buck and Curly joined two other dogs. One of them was a big, snow-white fellow from Spitzbergen who had been brought away by a whaling captain, and who had later accompanied a Geological Survey into the Barrens.

He was friendly, in a treacherous sort of way, smiling into one's face the while he meditated some underhand trick, as, for instance, when he stole from Buck's food at the first meal. As Buck sprang to punish him, the lash of Francois's whip sang through the air, reaching the culprit first; and nothing remained to Buck but to recover the bone. That was fair of Francois, he decided, and the half-breed began his rise in Buck's estimation.

The other dog made no advances, nor received any; also, he did not attempt to steal from the newcomers. He was a gloomy, morose fellow, ant he showed Curly plainly that all he desired was to be left alone, and further, that there would be trouble if he were not left alone. "Dave" he was called, and he ate and slept, or yawned between times, and took interest in nothing, not even when the Narwhal crossed Queen Charlotte Sound and rolled and pitched and bucked like a thing possessed. When Buck and Curly grew excited, half-wild with fear, he raised his head as though annoyed, favored them with an incurious glance, yawned, and went to sleep again.

Day and night the ship throbbed to the tireless pulse of the propeller, and though one day was very like another, it was apparent to Buck that the weather was steadily growing colder. At last, one morning, the propeller was quiet, and the Narwhal was pervaded with an atmosphere of excitement. He felt it, as did the other dogs, and knew that a change was at hand. Francois leashed them and brought them on deck. At the first step upon the cold surface, Buck's feet sank into a white mushy something very like mud. He sprang back with a snort. More of this white stuff was falling through the air. He shook himself, but more of it fell upon him. He sniffed it curiously, then licked some up on his tongue. It bit like fire, and the next instant was gone. This puzzled him. He tried it again, with the same results. The onlookers laughed uproariously, and he felt ashamed, he knew not why, for it was his first snow.

EVENTS happened very rapidly with Francis Morgan that 
late spring morning. If ever a man leaped across time into 
the raw, red drama and tragedy of the primitive and the 
medieval melodrama of sentiment and passion of the New 
World Latin, Francis Morgan was destined to be that man, 
and Destiny was very immediate upon him. 

Yet he was lazily unaware that aught in the world was 
stirring, and was scarcely astir himself. A late night at 
bridge had necessitated a late rising. A late breakfast of 
fruit and cereal had occurred along the route to the library 
the austerely elegant room from which his father, toward the 
last, had directed vast and manifold affairs. 

" Parker," he said to the valet who had been his father's 
before him, " did you ever notice any signs of fat on E.H.M. 
in his last days?" 

'"' Oh, no, sir," was the answer, uttered with all the due 
humility of the trained servant, but accompanied by an 
involuntarily measuring glance that scanned the young man's 
splendid proportions. ' Your father, sir, never lost his lean- 
ness. His figure was always the same, broad-shouldered, 
deep in the chest, big-boned, but lean, always lean, sir, in 
the middle. When he was laid out, sir, and bathed, his body 
would have shamed most of the young men about town. 
He always took good care of himself ; it was those exercises 
in bed, sir. Half an hour every morning. Nothing prevented. 
He called it religion." 

' Yes, he was a fine figure of a man," the young man 
responded idly, glancing to the stock-ticker and the several 
telephones his father had installed. 

' He was that," Parker agreed eagerly. " He was le.an 



2 HEARTS OF THREE 

and aristocratic in spite of his shoulders and bone and chest. 
And you've inherited it, sir, only on more generous lines." 

Young Francis Morgan, inheritor of many millions as well 
as brawn, lolled back luxuriously in a huge leather chair, 
stretched his legs after the manner of a full-vigored 
menagerie lion that is over-spilling with vigor, and glanced 
at a headline of the morning paper which informed him of a 
fresh slide in the Culebra Cut at Panama. 

" If I didn't know we Morgans didn't run that way," he 
yawned, " I'd be fat already from this existence. ... Eh, 
Parker?" 

The elderly valet, who Had neglected prompt reply, startled 
at the abrupt interrogative interruption of the pause. 

" Oh, yes, sir," he said hastily. " I mean, no, sir. You 
are in the pink of condition." 

" Not on your life, " the young man assured him. " I may 
not be getting fat, but I am certainly growing soft. . . . 
Eh, Parker?" 

' Yes, sir. No, sir; no, I mean no, sir. You're just the 
same as when you came home from college three years ago." 

" And took up loafing as a vocation," Francis laughed. 
" Parker!" 

Parker was alert attention. His master debated with him- 
self ponderously, as if the problem were of profound import- 
ance, rubbing the while the bristly thatch of the small tooth- 
brush moustache he had recently begun to sport on his upper 
lip. 

" Parker, I'm going fishing." 
1 Yes, sir!" 

" I ordered some rods sent up. Please joint them and let 
me give them the once over. The idea drifts through my 
mind that two weeks in the woods is what I need. If I don't, 
I'll surely^ start laying on flesh and disgrace the whole family 
tree. You remember Sir Henry? the old original Sir 
Henry, the buccaneer old swashbuckler?" 
' Yes, sir; I've read of him, sir." 

Parker had paused in the doorway until such time as the 
ebbing of his young master's volubility would permit him to 
depart on the errand. 

" Nothing to be proud of, the old pirate." 

" Oh, no, sir," Parker protested. " He was Governor of 
Jamaica. He died respected." 

" It was a mercy he didn't die hanged," Francis laughed. 
" As it was, he's the only disgrace in the family that he 



HEARTS OF THREE 3 

founded. But what I was going to say is that I've looked 
him up very carefully. He kept his figure and he died lean 
in the middle, thank God. It's a good inheritance he passed 
down. We Morgans never found his treasure; but beyond 
rubies is the lean-in-the-middle legacy he bequeathed us. 
It's what is called a fixed character in the breed that's 
what the profs taught me in the biology course." 

Parker faded out of the room in the ensuing silence, during 
which Francis Morgan buried himself in the Panama column 
and learned that the canal was not expected to be open for 
traffic for three weeks to come. 

A telephone buzzed, and, through the electric nerves of 
a consummate civilization, Destiny made the first out-reach 
of its tentacles and contacted with Francis Morgan in the 
library of the mansion his father had builded on Eiverside 
Drive. 

" But my dear Mrs. Carruthers," was his protest into the 
transmitter. ' Whatever it is, it is a mere local flurry. 
Tampico Petroleum is all right. It is not a gambling pro- 
position. It is legitimate investment. Stay with. Tie to 
it ... Some Minnesota farmer's come to town and is trying 
to buy a block or two because it looks as solid as it really 
is. ... What if it is up two points? Don't sell. Tampico 
Petroleum is not a lottery or a roulette proposition. It's 
bona fide industry. I wish it hadn't been so almighty big or 
I'd have financed it all myself. . . . Listen, please, it's not 
a flyer. Our present contracts for tanks is over a million. 
Our railroad and our three pipe-lines are costing more than 
five millions. Why, we've a hundred millions in producing 
wells right now, and our problem is to get it down country 
to the oil-steamers. This is the sober investment time. A 
year from now, or two years, and your shares will make 
government bonds look like something the cat brought 
in. ... 

' Yes, yes, please. Never mind how the market goes. 
Also, please, I didn't advise you to go in in the first place. 
I never advised a friend to that. But now that they are in, 
stick. It's as solid as the Bank of England. . . . Yes, Dicky 
and I divided the spoils last night. Lovely party, though 
Dicky's got too much temperament for bridge. . . . Yes, 
bull luck. ... Ha! ha! My temperament? Ha! Ha!. 
. . . Yes? . . . Tell Harry I'm off and away for a couple of 
weeks. . . . Fishing, troutlets, you know, the springtime 
and the streams, the rise of sap, the budding and the 



4 HEARTS OF THREE 

blossoming and all the rest. . . . Yes, good-bye, and hold 
on to Tampico Petroleum. If it goes down, after that 
Minnesota farmer's bulled it, buy a little more. I'm going 
to. It's finding money. . . . Yes. . . . Yes, surely. . . . 
It's too good to dare sell on a flyer now, because it mayn't 
ever again go down. ... Of course I know what I'm talk- 
ing about. I've just had eight hours' sleep, and haven't had 
a drink. . . . Yes, yes. . . . Good-bye." 

He pulled the ticker tape into the comfort of his chair and 
languidly ran over it, noting with mildly growing interest the 
message it conveyed. 

Parker returned with several slender rods, each a glittering 
gem of artisanship and art. Francis was out of his chair, 
ticker flung aside and forgotten as with the exultant joy of a 
boy he examined the toys and, one after another, began 
trying them, switching them through the air till they made 
shrill whip-like noises, moving them gently with prudence and 
precision under the lofty ceiling as he made believe to cast 
across the floor into some unseen pool of trout-lurking 
mystery. 

A telephone buzzed. Irritation was swift on his face. 

" For heaven's sake answer it, Parker, he commanded. 
" If it is some silly stock-gambling female, tell her I'm dead, 
or drunk, or down with typhoid, or getting married, or any- 
thing calamitous." 

After a moment's dialogue, conducted on Parker's part, in 
the discreet and modulated tones that befitted absolutely 
the cool, chaste, noble dignity of the room, with a " One 
moment, sir," into the transmitter, he muffled the trans- 
mitter with his hand and said : 

" It's Mr. Bascom, sir. He wants you." 

" Tell Mr. Bascom to go to hell," said Francis, simulating 
so long a cast, that, had it been in verity a cast, and had it 
pursued the course his fascinated gaze indicated, it would 
have gone through the window and most likely startled the 
gardener outside kneeling over the rose bush he was planting. 

" Mr. Bascom says it's about the market, sir, and that 
he'd like to talk with you only a moment," Parker urged, 
but so delicately and subduedly as to seem to be merely 
repeating an immaterial and unnecessary message. 

" All right." Francis carefully leaned the rod against a 
table and went to the 'phone. 

" Hello," he said into the telephone. ' Yes, this is I, 
Morgan. Sboqt ? What is it?" 



HEARTS OF THREE 5 

He listened for a minute, then interrupted irritably : " Sell 
hell. Nothing of the sort. ... Of course, I'm glad to 
know. Even if it goes up ten points, which it won't, hold on 
to everything. It may be a legitimate rise, and it mayn't 
ever come down. It's solid. It's worth far more than it's 
listed. I know, if the public doesn't. A year from now it'll 
list at two hundred . . . that is, if Mexico can cut the revolu- 
tion stuff. . . . Whenever it drops you'll have buying orders 
from me. ... Nonsense. Who wants control? It's purely 
sporadic ... eh? I beg your pardon. I mean it's merely 
temporary. Now I'm going off fishing for a fortnight. If it 
goes down five points, buy. Buy all that's offered. Say, 
when a fellow's got a real bona fide property, being bulled 
is almost as bad as having the bears after one . . . yes. 
. . . Sure. . . . yes. Good-bye." 

And while Francis returned delightedly to his fishing-rods, 
Destiny, in Thomas Regan's down-town private office, was 
working overtime. Having arranged with his various brokers 
to buy, and, through his divers channels of secret publicity 
having let slip the cryptic tip that something was wrong with 
Tampico Petroleum's concessions from the Mexican govern- 
ment, Thomas Regan studied a report of his own oil-expert 
emissary who had spent two months on the spot spying out 
what Tampico Petroleum really had in sight and prospect. 

A clerk brought in a card with the information that the 
visitor was importunate and foreign. Eegan listened, glanced 
at the card, and said : 

' Tell this Mister Senor Alvarez Torres of Ciodad de Colon 
that I can't see him." 

Five minutes later the clerk was back, this time with a 
message pencilled on the card. Regan grinned as he read it : 

" Dear Mr. Regan, 
" Honoured Sir : 

/ have the honour to inform you that I have a tip 
on the location of the treasure Sir Henry Morgan 
buried in old pirate days. 

" Alvarez Torres." 

Regan shook his head, and the clerk was nearly out of the 
room when his employer suddenly recalled him. 

" Show him in at once." 

In the interval of being alone, Regan chuckled to himself 
as he rolled the new idea over in his mind. " The unlickeci 

B 



6 HEARTS OF THREE 

cub ! " he muttered through the smoke of the cigar he was 
lighting. * Thinks he can play the lion part old E.H.M. 
played. A trimming is what he needs, and old Grayhead 
Thomas B. will see that he gets it." 

Senor Alvarez Torres' English was as correct as his modish 
spring suit, and though the bleached yellow of his skin adver- 
tised his Latin-American origin, and though his black eyes 
were eloquent of the mixed lustres of Spanish and Indian 
long compounded, nevertheless he was as thoroughly New 
Yorkish as Thomas Began could have wished. 

" By great effort, and years of research, I have finally 
won to the clue to the buccaneer gold of Sir Henry Morgan," 
he preambled. " Of course it's on the Mosquito Coast. I'll 
tell you now that it's not a thousand miles from the Chiriqui 
Lagoon, and that Bocas del Toro, within reason, may be 
described as the nearest town. I was born there educated 
in Paris, however and I know the neighbourhood like a 
book. A small schooner the outlay is cheap, most very 
cheap but the returns, the reward the treasure!" 

Senor Torres paused in eloquent inability to describe more 
definitely, and Thomas Began, hard man used to dealing 
with hard- men, proceeded to bore into him and his data like 
a cross-examining criminal lawyer. 

' Yes," Senor Torres quickly admitted, " I am somewhat 
embarrassed how shall I say? for immediate funds." 

' You need the money," the stock operator assured him 
brutally, and he bowed pained acquiescence. 

Much more he admitted under the rapid-fire interrogation. 
It was true, he had but recently left Bocas del Toro, but he 
hoped never again to go back. And yet he would go back if 
possibly some arrangement . . . 

But Began shut him off with the abrupt way of the master- 
man dealing with lesser fellow-creatures. He wrote a check, 
in the name of Alvarez Torres, and when that gentleman 
glanced at it he read the figures of a thousand dollars. 

" Now here's the idea," said Began. " I put no belief 
whatsoever in your story. But I have a young friend my 
heart is bound up in the boy but he is too much about town, 
the white lights and the white-lighted ladies, and the rest 
you understand?" And Senor Alvarez Torres bowed as one 
man of the world to another. " Now, for the good of his 
health, as well as his wealth and the saving of his soul, the 
best thing that could happen to him is a trip after treasure, 



HEARTS OF THREE 7 

adventure, exercise, and . . . you readily understand, I am 
sure." 

Again Alvarez Torres bowed. 

" You need the money," Began continued. " Strive to 
interest him. That thousand is for your effort. Succeed io 
interesting him so that he departs after old Morgan's gold, 
and two thousand more is yours. So thoroughly succeed in 
interesting him that he remains away three months, tw<? 
thousand more six months, five thousand. Oh, believe me, 
I knew his father. We were comrades, partners, I I might 
say, almost brothers. I would sacrifice any sum to win his 
son to manhood's wholesome path. What do you say? The 
thousand is yours to begin with. Well?" 

"Yith trembling fingers Senor Alvarez Torres folded and 
unfolded the check. 

" I . . .1 accept," he stammered and faltered in his 
eagerness. " I . . . I . . . How shall I say? ... I am 
yours to command." 

Five minutes later, as he arose to go, fully instructed in 
the part he was to play and with his story of Morgan's 
treasure revised to convincingness by the brass-tack business 
acumen of the stock-gambler, he blurted out, almost face- 
tiously, yet even more pathetically : 

" And the funniest thing about it, Mr. Began, is that it 
is true. Your advised changes in my narrative make it sound 
more true, but true it is under it all. I need the money. 
You are most munificent, and I shall do my best. ... I 
... I pride myself that I am an artist. But the real and 
solemn truth is that the clue to Morgan's buried loot is 
genuine. I have had access to records inaccessible to the 
public, which is neither here nor there, for the men of my 
own family they are family records ha^e had similar 
access, and have wasted their lives before me in the futile 
search. Yet were they on the right clue except that their 
wits made them miss the spot by twenty miles. It was there 
in the records. They missed it, because it was, I think, a 
deliberate trick, a conundrum, a puzzle, a disguisement, a 
maze, which I, and I alone, have penetrated and solved. 
The early navigators all played such tricks on the charts 
they drew. My Spanish race so hid the Hawaiian Islands by 
five degrees of longitude." 

All of which was in turn Greek to Thomas Began, who 
smiled his acceptance of listening and with the same smile 
conveyed his busy business-man's tolerant unbelief. 



8 HEARTS OF THEEE 

Scarcely was Senor Torres gone, when Francis Morgan was 
shown in. 

" Just thought I'd drop around for a bit of counsel," he 
said, greetings over. " And to whom but you should I apply, 
who so closely played the game with my father? You and 
he were partners, I understand, on some of the biggest deals. 
He always told me to trust your judgment. And, well, here 
I am, and I want to go fishing. What's up with Tampico 
Petroleum?" 

What is up?" Eegan countered, with fine simulation of 
ignorance of the very thing of moment he was responsible for 
precipitating. ' Tampico Petroleum?" 

Francis nodded, dropped into a chair, and lighted a cigar- 
ette, while Eegan consulted the ticker. 

Tampico Petroleum is up two points you should 
worry," he opined. 

" That's what I say," Francis concurred. " I should 
worry. But just the same, do you think some bunch, onto 
the inside value of it and it's big I speak under the rose, 
you know, I mean in absolute confidence?" Regan nodded. 
" It is big. It is right. It is the real thing. It is legitimate. 
Now this activity would you think that somebody, or some 
bunch, is trying to get control?" 

His father's associate, with the reverend gray of hair 
thatching his roof of crooked brain, shook the thatch. 

' Why," he amplified, " it may be just a flurry, or it may 
be a hunch on the stock public that it's really good. What do 
you say?" 

" Of course it's good," was Francis' warm response. 
" I've got reports, Began, so good they'd make your hair 
stand up. As I tell all my friends, this is the real legitimate. 
It's a damned shame I had to let the public in on it. It 
was so big, I just had to. Even all the money my father 
left me, couldn't swing it I mean, free money, not the 
stuff tied up money to work with." 

" Are you short?" the older man queried. 

" Oh, I've got a tidy bit to operate with," was the airy 
reply of youth. 
' " You mean . . . ?" 

" Sure. Just that. If she drops, I'll buy. It's finding 
money." 

" Just about how far would you buy?" was the next 
searching interrogation, masked by an expression of mingled 
good humor and approbation. 



HEARTS OF THREE 9 

" All I've got," came Francis Morgan's prompt answer. 
" I tell you, Eegan, it's immense." 

' I haven't looked into it to amount to anything, Francis; 
but I will say from the little I know that it listens good." 

" Listens! I teil you, Eegan, it's the Simon-pure, straight 
legitimate, and it's a shame to have it listed at all. I 
don't have to wreck anybody or anything to pull it across. 
The world will be better for my shooting into it I am afraid 
to say how many hundreds of millions of barrels of real 

oil say, I've got one well alone, in ths Huasteca field, 

that's gushed 27,000 barrels a day for seven months. And 
it's still doing it. That's the drop in the bucket we've 
got piped to market now. And it's twenty -two gravity, and 
carries less than two-tenths of one per cent, of sediment. 
And there's one gusher sixty miles of pipe to build to it, 
and pinched down to the limit of safety, that's pouring cut 
all over the landscape just about seventy thousand barrels 
a day. Of course, all in confidence, you know. We're 
doing nicely, and I don't want Tampico Petroleum to sky- 
rocket." 

" Don't you worry about that, my lad. You've got to 
get your oil piped, and the Mexican revolution straightened 
out before ever Tampico Petroleum soars. You go fishing 
and forget it." Eegan paused, with finely simulated sudden 
recollection, and picked up Alvarez Torres' card with the 
pencilled note. "Look, who's just been to see me." Appar- 
ently struck with an idea, Eegan retained the card a moment. 
" Why go fishing for mere trout? After all, it's only re- 
creation. Here's a thing to go fishing after that there's real 
recreation in, full-size man's recreation, and not the Persian- 
palace recreation of an Adirondack camp, with ice and ser- 
vants and electric push-buttons. Your father always was 
more than a mite proud of that old family pirate. He 
claimed to look like him, and you certainly look like your 
dad." 

" Sir Henry," Francis smiled, reaching for the card. 
" So am I a mite proud of the old scoundrel." 

He looked up questioningly from the reading of the card. 

" He's a plausible cuss," Eegan explained. " Claims 'to 
have been born right down there on the Mosquito Coast, 
and to have got the tip from private papers in his family. 
Not that I believe a word of it. I haven't time or interest 
to get started believing in stuff outside my own field." 

" Just the same, Sir Henry died practically a poor man," 



10 HEARTS OF THREE 

Francis asserted, the lines of the Morgan stubbornness knit- 
ting themselves for a flash on his brows. " And they never 
did find any of his buried treasure." 

" Good fishing," Eegan girded good-humor edly. 

"I'd like to meet this Alvarez Torres just the same," 
the young man responded. 

" Fool's gold," Eegan continued. " Though I must 
admit that the cuss is most exasperatingly plausible. Why, 
if I were younger but oh, the devil, my work's cut out for 
me here." 

"Do you know where I can find him?" Francis was 
asking the next moment, all unwittingly putting his neck 
into the net of tentacles that Destiny, in the visible incarna- 
tion of Thomas Eegan, was casting out to snare him. 

The next morning the meeting took place in Began 's 
office. Senor Alvarez Torres startled and controlled him- 
self at first sight of Francis' face. This was not missed by 
Eegan, who grinningly demanded: 

: ' Looks like the old pirate himself, eh?" 

; ' Yes, the resemblance is most striking," Torres lied, 
or half-lied, for he did recognize the resemblance to the 
portraits he had seen of Sir Henry Morgan ; although at the 
same time under his eyelids he saw the vision of another 
and living man who, no less than Francis and Sir Henry, 
looked as much like both of them as either looked like the 
other. 

Francis was youth that was not to be denied. Modern 
maps and ancient charts were pored over, as well* as old 
documents, handwritten in faded ink on time-yellowed 
paper, and at the end of half an hour he announced that 
the next fish he caught would be on either the Bull or 
the Calf the two islets off the Lagoon of Chiriqui, on one 
or the other of which Torres averred the treasure lay. 

" I'll catch to-night's train for New Orleans," Francis 
announced. " That will just make connection with one of 
the United Fruit Company's boats for Colon oh, I had it 
all looked up before I slept last night." 

" But don't charter a schooner at Colon," Torres advised. 
' Take the overland trip by horseback to Belen. There's 
the place to charter, with unsophisticated native sailors and 
everything else unsophisticated." 

" Listens good!" Francis agreed. " I always wanted to 
see that country down there. You'll be ready to catch to- 



HEARTS OF THREE 11 

night's train, Senor Torres? ... Of course, you under- 
stand, under the circumstances, I'll be the treasurer and 
foot the expenses." 

But at a privy glance from Began, Alvarez Torres lied 
with swift efficientness. 

" I must join you later, I regret, Mr. Morgan. Some 
little business that presses how shall I say? an insigni- 
ficant little lawsuit that must be settled first. Not that 
the sum at issue is important. But it is a family matter, 
and therefore gravely important. We Torres have our pride, 
which is a silly thing, I acknowledge, in this country, but 
which with us is very serious." 

" He can join afterward, and straighten you out if you've 
missed the scent," Regan assured Francis. " And, before 
it slips your mind, it might be just as well to arrange with 
Senor Torres some division of the loot ... if you ever find 
it." 

" What would you say?" Francis asked. 

" Equal division, fifty-fifty," Regan answered, magnifi- 
cently arranging the apportionment between the two men 
of something he was certain did not exist. 

" And you will follow after as soon as you can?" Francis 
asked the Latin American. ' Regan, take hold of his 
little law affair yourself and expedite it, won't you?" 

" Sure, boy," was the answer. " And, if it's needed, 
shall I advance cash to Senor Alvarez?" 

" Fine!" Francis shook their hands in both of his. 
" It will save me bother. And I've got to rush to pack 
and break engagements and catch that train. So long, 
Regan. Good-bye, Senor Torres, until we meet somewhere 
around Bocas del Toro, or in a little hole in the ground 
on the Bull or the Calf you say you think it's the Calf? 
Well, until then adios!' 

And Senor Alvarez Torres remained with Regan some 
time longer, receiving explicit instructions for the part he 
was to play, beginning with retardation and delay of Francis' 
expedition, and culminating in similar retardation and delay 
always to be continued. 

" In short," Regan concluded, " I don't almost care if 
he never comes back if you can keep him down there for 
the good of his health that long and longer." 



CHAPTEE II 

MONEY, like youth, will not be denied, and Francis Morgan, 
who was the man-legal and nature-certain representative 
of both youth and money, found himself one afternoon, 
three weeks after he had said good-bye to Began, becalmed 
close under the land on board his schooner, the Angelique. 
The water was glassy, the smooth roll scarcely perceptible, 
and, in sheer ennui and overplus of energy that likewise 
declined to be denied, he asked the captain, a breed, half 
Jamaica negro and half Indian, to order a small skiff over 
the side. 

" Looks like I might shoot a parrot or a monkey or 
something," he explained, searching the jungle-clad shore, 
half a mile away, through a twelve-power Zeiss glass. 

" Most problematic, sir, that you are bitten by a labarri, 
which is deadly viper in these parts," grinned the breed 
skipper and owner of the Angelique, who, from his Jamaica 
father had inherited the gift of tongues. 

But Francis was not to be deterred; for at the moment, 
through his glass, he had picked out, first, in the middle 
ground, a white hacienda, and second, on the beach, a 
white-clad woman's form, and further, had seen that she 
was scrutinising him and the schooner through a pair of 
binoculars. 

: ' Put the skiff over, skipper," he ordered. ;< Who lives 
around here? white folks?" 

" The Enrico Solano family, sir," was the answer. " My 
word, they are important gentlefolk, old Spanish, and they 
own the entire general landscape from the sea to the Cordil- 
leras and half of the Chiriqui Lagoon as well. They are 
very poor, most powerful rich ... in landscape and they 
are pridef ul and fiery as cayenne pepper. ' ' 

As Francis, in the tiny skiff, rowed shoreward, the 
skipper's alert eye noted that he had neglected to take along 
either rifle or shotgun for the contemplated parrot or 

HEARTS OF THREE 13 

monkey. And, next, the skipper's eye picked up the white- 
clad woman's figure against the dark edge of the jungle. 

Straight to the white beach of coral sand Francis rowed, 
not trusting himself to look over his shoulder to see if the 
woman remained or had vanished. In his mind was merely 
a young man's healthy idea of encountering a bucolic 
young lady, or a half -wild white woman for that matter, 
or at the best a very provincial one, with whom he could fool 
and fun away a few minutes of the calm that fettered 
the Ang clique to immobility. When the skifl grounded, he 
stepped out, and with one sturdy arm lifted its nose high 
enough up the sand to fasten it by its own weight. Then 
he turned around. The beach to the jungle was bare. He 
strode forward confidently. Any traveller, on so strange 
a shore, had a right to seek inhabitants for information on 
his way was the idea he was acting out. 

He glanced around at his friend reading the letter and saw the books on
the table.  Into his eyes leaped a wistfulness and a yearning as promptly
as the yearning leaps into the eyes of a starving man at sight of food.
An impulsive stride, with one lurch to right and left of the shoulders,
brought him to the table, where he began affectionately handling the
books.  He glanced at the titles and the authors' names, read fragments
of text, caressing the volumes with his eyes and hands, and, once,
recognized a book he had read.  For the rest, they were strange books and
strange authors.  He chanced upon a volume of Swinburne and began reading
steadily, forgetful of where he was, his face glowing.  Twice he closed
the book on his forefinger to look at the name of the author.  Swinburne!
he would remember that name.  That fellow had eyes, and he had certainly
seen color and flashing light.  But who was Swinburne?  Was he dead a
hundred years or so, like most of the poets?  Or was he alive still, and
writing?  He turned to the title-page yes, he had written other
books; well, he would go to the free library the first thing in the
morning and try to get hold of some of Swinburne's stuff.  He went back
to the text and lost himself.  He did not notice that a young woman had
entered the room.  The first he knew was when he heard Arthur's voice
saying.

The book was closed on his forefinger, and before he turned he was
thrilling to the first new impression, which was not of the girl, but of
her brother's words.  Under that muscled body of his he was a mass of
quivering sensibilities.  At the slightest impact of the outside world
upon his consciousness, his thoughts, sympathies, and emotions leapt and
played like lambent flame.  He was extraordinarily receptive and
responsive, while his imagination, pitched high, was ever at work
establishing relations of likeness and difference.  "Mr. Eden," was what
he had thrilled to he who had been called "Eden," or "Martin Eden," or
just "Martin," all his life.  And "_Mister_!"  It was certainly going
some, was his internal comment.  His mind seemed to turn, on the instant,
into a vast camera obscura, and he saw arrayed around his consciousness
endless pictures from his life, of stoke-holes and forecastles, camps and
beaches, jails and boozing-kens, fever-hospitals and slum streets,
wherein the thread of association was the fashion in which he had been
addressed in those various situations.

And then he turned and saw the girl.  The phantasmagoria of his brain
vanished at sight of her.  She was a pale, ethereal creature, with wide,
spiritual blue eyes and a wealth of golden hair.  He did not know how she
was dressed, except that the dress was as wonderful as she.  He likened
her to a pale gold flower upon a slender stem.  No, she was a spirit, a
divinity, a goddess; such sublimated beauty was not of the earth.  Or
perhaps the books were right, and there were many such as she in the
upper walks of life.  She might well be sung by that chap, Swinburne.
Perhaps he had had somebody like her in mind when he painted that girl,
Iseult, in the book there on the table.  All this plethora of sight, and
feeling, and thought occurred on the instant.  There was no pause of the
realities wherein he moved.  He saw her hand coming out to his, and she
looked him straight in the eyes as she shook hands, frankly, like a man.
The women he had known did not shake hands that way.  For that matter,
most of them did not shake hands at all.  A flood of associations,
visions of various ways he had made the acquaintance of women, rushed
into his mind and threatened to swamp it.  But he shook them aside and
looked at her.  Never had he seen such a woman.  The women he had known!
Immediately, beside her, on either hand, ranged the women he had known.
For an eternal second he stood in the midst of a portrait gallery,
wherein she occupied the central place, while about her were limned many
women, all to be weighed and measured by a fleeting glance, herself the
unit of weight and measure.  He saw the weak and sickly faces of the
girls of the factories, and the simpering, boisterous girls from the
south of Market.  There were women of the cattle camps, and swarthy
cigarette-smoking women of Old Mexico.  These, in turn, were crowded out
by Japanese women, doll-like, stepping mincingly on wooden clogs; by
Eurasians, delicate featured, stamped with degeneracy; by full-bodied
South-Sea-Island women, flower-crowned and brown-skinned.  All these were
blotted out by a grotesque and terrible nightmare brood-frowsy,
shuffling creatures from the pavements of Whitechapel, gin-bloated hags
of the stews, and all the vast hell's following of harpies, vile-mouthed
and filthy, that under the guise of monstrous female form prey upon
sailors, the scrapings of the ports, the scum and slime of the human pit.

He waved his hand deprecatingly and muttered that it was nothing at all,
what he had done, and that any fellow would have done it.  She noticed
that the hand he waved was covered with fresh abrasions, in the process
of healing, and a glance at the other loose-hanging hand showed it to be
in the same condition.  Also, with quick, critical eye, she noted a scar
on his cheek, another that peeped out from under the hair of the
forehead, and a third that ran down and disappeared under the starched
collar.  She repressed a smile at sight of the red line that marked the
chafe of the collar against the bronzed neck.  He was evidently unused to
stiff collars.  Likewise her feminine eye took in the clothes he wore,
the cheap and unaesthetic cut, the wrinkling of the coat across the
shoulders, and the series of wrinkles in the sleeves that advertised
bulging biceps muscles.

While he waved his hand and muttered that he had done nothing at all, he
was obeying her behest by trying to get into a chair.  He found time to
admire the ease with which she sat down, then lurched toward a chair
facing her, overwhelmed with consciousness of the awkward figure he was
cutting.  This was a new experience for him.  All his life, up to then,
he had been unaware of being either graceful or awkward.  Such thoughts
of self had never entered his mind.  He sat down gingerly on the edge of
the chair, greatly worried by his hands.  They were in the way wherever
he put them.  Arthur was leaving the room, and Martin Eden followed his
exit with longing eyes.  He felt lost, alone there in the room with that
pale spirit of a woman.  There was no bar-keeper upon whom to call for
drinks, no small boy to send around the corner for a can of beer and by
means of that social fluid start the amenities of friendship flowing.
And thereat she began to talk quickly and easily upon the subject he had
suggested.  He felt better, and settled back slightly from the edge of
the chair, holding tightly to its arms with his hands, as if it might get
away from him and buck him to the floor.  He had succeeded in making her
talk her talk, and while she rattled on, he strove to follow her,
marvelling at all the knowledge that was stowed away in that pretty head
of hers, and drinking in the pale beauty of her face.  Follow her he did,
though bothered by unfamiliar words that fell glibly from her lips and by
critical phrases and thought-processes that were foreign to his mind, but
that nevertheless stimulated his mind and set it tingling.  Here was
intellectual life, he thought, and here was beauty, warm and wonderful as
he had never dreamed it could be.  He forgot himself and stared at her
with hungry eyes.  Here was something to live for, to win to, to fight
for-ay, and die for.  The books were true.  There were such women in the
world.  She was one of them.  She lent wings to his imagination, and
great, luminous canvases spread themselves before him whereon loomed
vague, gigantic figures of love and romance, and of heroic deeds for
woman's sake-for a pale woman, a flower of gold.  And through the
swaying, palpitant vision, as through a fairy mirage, he stared at the
real woman, sitting there and talking of literature and art.  He listened
as well, but he stared, unconscious of the fixity of his gaze or of the
fact that all that was essentially masculine in his nature was shining in
his eyes.  But she, who knew little of the world of men, being a woman,
was keenly aware of his burning eyes.  She had never had men look at her
in such fashion, and it embarrassed her.  She stumbled and halted in her
utterance.  The thread of argument slipped from her.  He frightened her,
and at the same time it was strangely pleasant to be so looked upon.  Her
training warned her of peril and of wrong, subtle, mysterious, luring;
while her instincts rang clarion-voiced through her being, impelling her
to hurdle caste and place and gain to this traveller from another world,
to this uncouth young fellow with lacerated hands and a line of raw red
caused by the unaccustomed linen at his throat, who, all too evidently,
was soiled and tainted by ungracious existence.  She was clean, and her
cleanness revolted; but she was woman, and she was just beginning to
learn the paradox of woman.
He broke off lamely.  He was confused, painfully conscious of his
inarticulateness.  He had felt the bigness and glow of life in what he
had read, but his speech was inadequate.  He could not express what he
felt, and to himself he likened himself to a sailor, in a strange ship,
on a dark night, groping about in the unfamiliar running rigging.  Well,
he decided, it was up to him to get acquainted in this new world.  He had
never seen anything that he couldn't get the hang of when he wanted to
and it was about time for him to want to learn to talk the things that
were inside of him so that she could understand.  _She_ was bulking large
on his horizon.

The process of getting into the dining room was a nightmare to him.
Between halts and stumbles, jerks and lurches, locomotion had at times
seemed impossible.  But at last he had made it, and was seated alongside
of Her.  The array of knives and forks frightened him.  They bristled
with unknown perils, and he gazed at them, fascinated, till their dazzle
became a background across which moved a succession of forecastle
pictures, wherein he and his mates sat eating salt beef with
sheath-knives and fingers, or scooping thick pea-soup out of pannikins by
means of battered iron spoons.  The stench of bad beef was in his
nostrils, while in his ears, to the accompaniment of creaking timbers and
groaning bulkheads, echoed the loud mouth-noises of the eaters.  He
watched them eating, and decided that they ate like pigs.  Well, he would
be careful here.  He would make no noise.  He would keep his mind upon it
all the time.

He glanced around the table.  Opposite him was Arthur, and Arthur's
brother, Norman.  They were her brothers, he reminded himself, and his
heart warmed toward them.  How they loved each other, the members of this
family!  There flashed into his mind the picture of her mother, of the
kiss of greeting, and of the pair of them walking toward him with arms
entwined.  Not in his world were such displays of affection between
parents and children made.  It was a revelation of the heights of
existence that were attained in the world above.  It was the finest thing
yet that he had seen in this small glimpse of that world.  He was moved
deeply by appreciation of it, and his heart was melting with sympathetic
tenderness.  He had starved for love all his life.  His nature craved
love.  It was an organic demand of his being.  Yet he had gone without,
and hardened himself in the process.  He had not known that he needed
love.  Nor did he know it now.  He merely saw it in operation, and
thrilled to it, and thought it fine, and high, and splendid.

He was glad that Mr. Morse was not there.  It was difficult enough
getting acquainted with her, and her mother, and her brother, Norman.
Arthur he already knew somewhat.  The father would have been too much for
him, he felt sure.  It seemed to him that he had never worked so hard in
his life.  The severest toil was child's play compared with this.  Tiny
nodules of moisture stood out on his forehead, and his shirt was wet with
sweat from the exertion of doing so many unaccustomed things at once.  He
had to eat as he had never eaten before, to handle strange tools, to
glance surreptitiously about and learn how to accomplish each new thing,
to receive the flood of impressions that was pouring in upon him and
being mentally annotated and classified; to be conscious of a yearning
for her that perturbed him in the form of a dull, aching restlessness; to
feel the prod of desire to win to the walk in life whereon she trod, and
to have his mind ever and again straying off in speculation and vague
plans of how to reach to her.  Also, when his secret glance went across
to Norman opposite him, or to any one else, to ascertain just what knife
or fork was to be used in any particular occasion, that person's features
were seized upon by his mind, which automatically strove to appraise them
and to divine what they were-all in relation to her.  Then he had to
talk, to hear what was said to him and what was said back and forth, and
to answer, when it was necessary, with a tongue prone to looseness of
speech that required a constant curb.  And to add confusion to confusion,
there was the servant, an unceasing menace, that appeared noiselessly at
his shoulder, a dire Sphinx that propounded puzzles and conundrums
demanding instantaneous solution.  He was oppressed throughout the meal
by the thought of finger-bowls.  Irrelevantly, insistently, scores of
times, he wondered when they would come on and what they looked like.  He
had heard of such things, and now, sooner or later, somewhere in the next
few minutes, he would see them, sit at table with exalted beings who used
them-ay, and he would use them himself.  And most important of all, far
down and yet always at the surface of his thought, was the problem of how
he should comport himself toward these persons.  What should his attitude
be?  He wrestled continually and anxiously with the problem.  There were
cowardly suggestions that he should make believe, assume a part; and
there were still more cowardly suggestions that warned him he would fail
in such course, that his nature was not fitted to live up to it, and that
he would make a fool of himself.

It was during the first part of the dinner, struggling to decide upon his
attitude, that he was very quiet.  He did not know that his quietness was
giving the lie to Arthur's words of the day before, when that brother of
hers had announced that he was going to bring a wild man home to dinner
and for them not to be alarmed, because they would find him an
interesting wild man.  Martin Eden could not have found it in him, just
then, to believe that her brother could be guilty of such
treachery-especially when he had been the means of getting this
particular brother out of an unpleasant row.  So he sat at table,
perturbed by his own unfitness and at the same time charmed by all that
went on about him.  For the first time he realized that eating was
something more than a utilitarian function.  He was unaware of what he
ate.  It was merely food.  He was feasting his love of beauty at this
table where eating was an aesthetic function.  It was an intellectual
function, too.  His mind was stirred.  He heard words spoken that were
meaningless to him, and other words that he had seen only in books and
that no man or woman he had known was of large enough mental caliber to
pronounce.  When he heard such words dropping carelessly from the lips of
the members of this marvellous family, her family, he thrilled with
delight.  The romance, and beauty, and high vigor of the books were
coming true.  He was in that rare and blissful state wherein a man sees
his dreams stalk out from the crannies of fantasy and become fact.

Never had he been at such an altitude of living, and he kept himself in
the background, listening, observing, and pleasuring, replying in
reticent monosyllables, saying, "Yes, miss," and "No, miss," to her, and
"Yes, ma'am," and "No, ma'am," to her mother.  He curbed the impulse,
arising out of his sea-training, to say "Yes, sir," and "No, sir," to her
brothers.  He felt that it would be inappropriate and a confession of
inferiority on his part-which would never do if he was to win to her.
Also, it was a dictate of his pride.  "By God!" he cried to himself,
once; "I'm just as good as them, and if they do know lots that I don't, I
could learn 'm a few myself, all the same!"  And the next moment, when
she or her mother addressed him as "Mr. Eden," his aggressive pride was
forgotten, and he was glowing and warm with delight.  He was a civilized
man, that was what he was, shoulder to shoulder, at dinner, with people
he had read about in books.  He was in the books himself, adventuring
through the printed pages of bound volumes.

But while he belied Arthur's description, and appeared a gentle lamb
rather than a wild man, he was racking his brains for a course of action.
He was no gentle lamb, and the part of second fiddle would never do for
the high-pitched dominance of his nature.  He talked only when he had to,
and then his speech was like his walk to the table, filled with jerks and
halts as he groped in his polyglot vocabulary for words, debating over
words he knew were fit but which he feared he could not pronounce,
rejecting other words he knew would not be understood or would be raw and
harsh.  But all the time he was oppressed by the consciousness that this
carefulness of diction was making a booby of him, preventing him from
expressing what he had in him.  Also, his love of freedom chafed against
the restriction in much the same way his neck chafed against the starched
fetter of a collar.  Besides, he was confident that he could not keep it
up.  He was by nature powerful of thought and sensibility, and the
creative spirit was restive and urgent.  He was swiftly mastered by the
concept or sensation in him that struggled in birth-throes to receive
expression and form, and then he forgot himself and where he was, and the
old words the tools of speech he knew slipped out.

Once, he declined something from the servant who interrupted and pestered
at his shoulder, and he said, shortly and emphatically, "Pew!"

On the instant those at the table were keyed up and expectant, the
servant was smugly pleased, and he was wallowing in mortification.  But
he recovered himself quickly.

"It's the Kanaka for 'finish,'" he explained, "and it just come out
naturally.  It's spelt p-a-u."

He caught her curious and speculative eyes fixed on his hands, and, being
in explanatory mood, he said:-

"I just come down the Coast on one of the Pacific mail steamers.  She was
behind time, an' around the Puget Sound ports we worked like niggers,
storing cargo-mixed freight, if you know what that means.  That's how the
skin got knocked off."

"Oh, it wasn't that," she hastened to explain, in turn.  "Your hands
seemed too small for your body."

His cheeks were hot.  He took it as an exposure of another of his
deficiencies.

"Yes," he said depreciatingly.  "They ain't big enough to stand the
strain.  I can hit like a mule with my arms and shoulders.  They are too
strong, an' when I smash a man on the jaw the hands get smashed, too."

He was not happy at what he had said.  He was filled with disgust at
himself.  He had loosed the guard upon his tongue and talked about things
that were not nice.

"It was brave of you to help Arthur the way you did-and you a stranger,"
she said tactfully, aware of his discomfiture though not of the reason
for it.

He, in turn, realized what she had done, and in the consequent warm surge
of gratefulness that overwhelmed him forgot his loose-worded tongue.

"It wasn't nothin' at all," he said.  "Any guy 'ud do it for another.
That bunch of hoodlums was lookin' for trouble, an' Arthur wasn't
botherin' 'em none.  They butted in on 'm, an' then I butted in on them
an' poked a few.  That's where some of the skin off my hands went, along
with some of the teeth of the gang.  I wouldn't 'a' missed it for
anything.  When I seen"

He paused, open-mouthed, on the verge of the pit of his own depravity and
utter worthlessness to breathe the same air she did.  And while Arthur
took up the tale, for the twentieth time, of his adventure with the
drunken hoodlums on the ferry-boat and of how Martin Eden had rushed in
and rescued him, that individual, with frowning brows, meditated upon the
fool he had made of himself, and wrestled more determinedly with the
problem of how he should conduct himself toward these people.  He
certainly had not succeeded so far.  He wasn't of their tribe, and he
couldn't talk their lingo, was the way he put it to himself.  He couldn't
fake being their kind.  The masquerade would fail, and besides,
masquerade was foreign to his nature. There was no room in him for sham
or artifice.  Whatever happened, he must be real.  He couldn't talk their
talk just yet, though in time he would.  Upon that he was resolved.  But
in the meantime, talk he must, and it must be his own talk, toned down,
of course, so as to be comprehensible to them and so as not to shook them
too much.  And furthermore, he wouldn't claim, not even by tacit
acceptance, to be familiar with anything that was unfamiliar.  In
pursuance of this decision, when the two brothers, talking university
shop, had used "trig" several times, Martin Eden demanded

Martin Eden, with blood still crawling from contact with his brother-in-
law, felt his way along the unlighted back hall and entered his room, a
tiny cubbyhole with space for a bed, a wash-stand, and one chair.  Mr.
Higginbotham was too thrifty to keep a servant when his wife could do the
work.  Besides, the servant's room enabled them to take in two boarders
instead of one.  Martin placed the Swinburne and Browning on the chair,
took off his coat, and sat down on the bed.  A screeching of asthmatic
springs greeted the weight of his body, but he did not notice them.  He
started to take off his shoes, but fell to staring at the white plaster
wall opposite him, broken by long streaks of dirty brown where rain had
leaked through the roof.  On this befouled background visions began to
flow and burn.  He forgot his shoes and stared long, till his lips began
to move and he murmured, Ruth.

He had not thought a simple sound could be so beautiful.  It
delighted his ear, and he grew intoxicated with the repetition of it.
"Ruth."  It was a talisman, a magic word to conjure with.  Each time he
murmured it, her face shimmered before him, suffusing the foul wall with
a golden radiance.  This radiance did not stop at the wall.  It extended
on into infinity, and through its golden depths his soul went questing
after hers.  The best that was in him was out in splendid flood.  The
very thought of her ennobled and purified him, made him better, and made
him want to be better.  This was new to him.  He had never known women
who had made him better.  They had always had the counter effect of
making him beastly.  He did not know that many of them had done their
best, bad as it was.  Never having been conscious of himself, he did not
know that he had that in his being that drew love from women and which
had been the cause of their reaching out for his youth.  Though they had
often bothered him, he had never bothered about them; and he would never
have dreamed that there were women who had been better because of him.
Always in sublime carelessness had he lived, till now, and now it seemed
to him that they had always reached out and dragged at him with vile
hands.  This was not just to them, nor to himself.  But he, who for the
first time was becoming conscious of himself, was in no condition to
judge, and he burned with shame as he stared at the vision of his infamy.

He got up abruptly and tried to see himself in the dirty looking-glass
over the wash-stand.  He passed a towel over it and looked again, long
and carefully.  It was the first time he had ever really seen himself.
His eyes were made for seeing, but up to that moment they had been filled
with the ever changing panorama of the world, at which he had been too
busy gazing, ever to gaze at himself.  He saw the head and face of a
young fellow of twenty, but, being unused to such appraisement, he did
not know how to value it.  Above a square-domed forehead he saw a mop of
brown hair, nut-brown, with a wave to it and hints of curls that were a
delight to any woman, making hands tingle to stroke it and fingers tingle
to pass caresses through it.  But he passed it by as without merit, in
Her eyes, and dwelt long and thoughtfully on the high, square
forehead,-striving to penetrate it and learn the quality of its content.
What kind of a brain lay behind there? was his insistent interrogation.
What was it capable of?  How far would it take him?  Would it take him to
her?

Mr. Morse met Martin in the office of the Hotel Metropole. Whether
he had happened there just casually, intent on other affairs, or
whether he had come there for the direct purpose of inviting him to
dinner, Martin never could quite make up his mind, though he
inclined toward the second hypothesis. At any rate, invited to
dinner he was by Mr. Morse - Ruth's father, who had forbidden him
the house and broken off the engagement.

Martin was not angry. He was not even on his dignity. He
tolerated Mr. Morse, wondering the while how it felt to eat such
humble pie. He did not decline the invitation. Instead, he put it
off with vagueness and indefiniteness and inquired after the
family, particularly after Mrs. Morse and Ruth. He spoke her name
without hesitancy, naturally, though secretly surprised that he had
had no inward quiver, no old, familiar increase of pulse and warm
surge of blood.

He had many invitations to dinner, some of which he accepted.
Persons got themselves introduced to him in order to invite him to
dinner. And he went on puzzling over the little thing that was
becoming a great thing. Bernard Higginbotham invited him to
dinner. He puzzled the harder. He remembered the days of his
desperate starvation when no one invited him to dinner. That was
the time he needed dinners, and went weak and faint for lack of
them and lost weight from sheer famine. That was the paradox of
it. When he wanted dinners, no one gave them to him, and now that
he could buy a hundred thousand dinners and was losing his
appetite, dinners were thrust upon him right and left. But why?
There was no justice in it, no merit on his part. He was no
different. All the work he had done was even at that time work
performed. Mr. and Mrs. Morse had condemned him for an idler and a
shirk and through Ruth had urged that he take a clerk's position in
an office. Furthermore, they had been aware of his work performed.
Manuscript after manuscript of his had been turned over to them by
Ruth. They had read them. It was the very same work that had put
his name in all the papers, and, it was his name being in all the
papers that led them to invite him.

One thing was certain: the Morses had not cared to have him for
himself or for his work. Therefore they could not want him now for
himself or for his work, but for the fame that was his, because he
was somebody amongst men, and - why not? - because he had a hundred
thousand dollars or so. That was the way bourgeois society valued
a man, and who was he to expect it otherwise? But he was proud.
He disdained such valuation. He desired to be valued for himself,
or for his work, which, after all, was an expression of himself.
That was the way Lizzie valued him. The work, with her, did not
even count. She valued him, himself. That was the way Jimmy, the
plumber, and all the old gang valued him. That had been proved
often enough in the days when he ran with them; it had been proved
that Sunday at Shell Mound Park. His work could go hang. What
they liked, and were willing to scrap for, was just Mart Eden, one
of the bunch and a pretty good guy.

Then there was Ruth. She had liked him for himself, that was
indisputable. And yet, much as she had liked him she had liked the
bourgeois standard of valuation more. She had opposed his writing,
and principally, it seemed to him, because it did not earn money.
That had been her criticism of his "Love-cycle." She, too, had
urged him to get a job. It was true, she refined it to "position,"
but it meant the same thing, and in his own mind the old
nomenclature stuck. He had read her all that he wrote - poems,
stories, essays - "Wiki-Wiki," "The Shame of the Sun," everything.
And she had always and consistently urged him to get a job, to go
to work - good God! - as if he hadn't been working, robbing sleep,
exhausting life, in order to be worthy of her.

So the little thing grew bigger. He was healthy and normal, ate
regularly, slept long hours, and yet the growing little thing was
becoming an obsession. WORK PERFORMED. The phrase haunted his
brain. He sat opposite Bernard Higginbotham at a heavy Sunday
dinner over Higginbotham's Cash Store, and it was all he could do
to restrain himself from shouting out:-

"It was work performed! And now you feed me, when then you let me
starve, forbade me your house, and damned me because I wouldn't get
a job. And the work was already done, all done. And now, when I
speak, you check the thought unuttered on your lips and hang on my
lips and pay respectful attention to whatever I choose to say. I
tell you your party is rotten and filled with grafters, and instead
of flying into a rage you hum and haw and admit there is a great
deal in what I say. And why? Because I'm famous; because I've a
lot of money. Not because I'm Martin Eden, a pretty good fellow
and not particularly a fool. I could tell you the moon is made of
green cheese and you would subscribe to the notion, at least you
would not repudiate it, because I've got dollars, mountains of
them. And it was all done long ago; it was work performed, I tell
you, when you spat upon me as the dirt under your feet."

But Martin did not shout out. The thought gnawed in his brain, an
unceasing torment, while he smiled and succeeded in being tolerant.
As he grew silent, Bernard Higginbotham got the reins and did the
talking. He was a success himself, and proud of it. He was self-
made. No one had helped him. He owed no man. He was fulfilling
his duty as a citizen and bringing up a large family. And there
was Higginbotham's Cash Store, that monument of his own industry
and ability. He loved Higginbotham's Cash Store as some men loved
their wives. He opened up his heart to Martin, showed with what
keenness and with what enormous planning he had made the store.
And he had plans for it, ambitious plans. The neighborhood was
growing up fast. The store was really too small. If he had more
room, he would be able to put in a score of labor-saving and money-
saving improvements. And he would do it yet. He was straining
every effort for the day when he could buy the adjoining lot and
put up another two-story frame building. The upstairs he could
rent, and the whole ground-floor of both buildings would be
Higginbotham's Cash Store. His eyes glistened when he spoke of the
new sign that would stretch clear across both buildings.

Martin forgot to listen. The refrain of "Work performed," in his
own brain, was drowning the other's clatter. The refrain maddened
him, and he tried to escape from it.

"How much did you say it would cost?" he asked suddenly.

His brother-in-law paused in the middle of an expatiation on the
business opportunities of the neighborhood. He hadn't said how
much it would cost. But he knew. He had figured it out a score of
times.

"At the way lumber is now," he said, "four thousand could do it."

"Including the sign?"

"I didn't count on that. It'd just have to come, onc't the
buildin' was there."

"And the ground?"

"Three thousand more."

He leaned forward, licking his lips, nervously spreading and
closing his fingers, while he watched Martin write a check. When
it was passed over to him, he glanced at the amount-seven thousand
dollars.

"I - I can't afford to pay more than six per cent," he said
huskily.

Martin wanted to laugh, but, instead, demanded:-

"How much would that be?"

"Lemme see. Six per cent - six times seven - four hundred an'
twenty."

"That would be thirty-five dollars a month, wouldn't it?"

Higginbotham nodded.

"Then, if you've no objection, well arrange it this way." Martin
glanced at Gertrude. "You can have the principal to keep for
yourself, if you'll use the thirty-five dollars a month for cooking
and washing and scrubbing. The seven thousand is yours if you'll
guarantee that Gertrude does no more drudgery. Is it a go?"

Mr. Higginbotham swallowed hard. That his wife should do no more
housework was an affront to his thrifty soul. The magnificent
present was the coating of a pill, a bitter pill. That his wife
should not work! It gagged him.

"All right, then," Martin said. "I'll pay the thirty-five a month,
and - "

He reached across the table for the check. But Bernard
Higginbotham got his hand on it first, crying:

"I accept! I accept!"

When Martin got on the electric car, he was very sick and tired.
He looked up at the assertive sign.

"The swine," he groaned. "The swine, the swine."

When MACKINTOSH'S MAGAZINE published "The Palmist," featuring it
with decorations by Berthier and with two pictures by Wenn, Hermann
von Schmidt forgot that he had called the verses obscene. He
announced that his wife had inspired the poem, saw to it that the
news reached the ears of a reporter, and submitted to an interview
by a staff writer who was accompanied by a staff photographer and a
staff artist. The result was a full page in a Sunday supplement,
filled with photographs and idealized drawings of Marian, with many
intimate details of Martin Eden and his family, and with the full
text of "The Palmist" in large type, and republished by special
permission of MACKINTOSH'S MAGAZINE. It caused quite a stir in the
neighborhood, and good housewives were proud to have the
acquaintances of the great writer's sister, while those who had not
made haste to cultivate it. Hermann von Schmidt chuckled in his
little repair shop and decided to order a new lathe. "Better than
advertising," he told Marian, "and it costs nothing."

"We'd better have him to dinner," she suggested.

And to dinner Martin came, making himself agreeable with the fat
wholesale butcher and his fatter wife - important folk, they,
likely to be of use to a rising young man like Hermann Yon Schmidt.
No less a bait, however, had been required to draw them to his
house than his great brother-in-law. Another man at table who had
swallowed the same bait was the superintendent of the Pacific Coast
agencies for the Asa Bicycle Company. Him Von Schmidt desired to
please and propitiate because from him could be obtained the
Oakland agency for the bicycle. So Hermann von Schmidt found it a
goodly asset to have Martin for a brother-in-law, but in his heart
of hearts he couldn't understand where it all came in. In the
silent watches of the night, while his wife slept, he had
floundered through Martin's books and poems, and decided that the
world was a fool to buy them.

And in his heart of hearts Martin understood the situation only too
well, as he leaned back and gloated at Von Schmidt's head, in fancy
punching it well-nigh off of him, sending blow after blow home just
right - the chuckle-headed Dutchman! One thing he did like about
him, however. Poor as he was, and determined to rise as he was, he
nevertheless hired one servant to take the heavy work off of
Marian's hands. Martin talked with the superintendent of the Asa
agencies, and after dinner he drew him aside with Hermann, whom he
backed financially for the best bicycle store with fittings in
Oakland. He went further, and in a private talk with Hermann told
him to keep his eyes open for an automobile agency and garage, for
there was no reason that he should not be able to run both
establishments successfully.

With tears in her eyes and her arms around his neck, Marian, at
parting, told Martin how much she loved him and always had loved
him. It was true, there was a perceptible halt midway in her
assertion, which she glossed over with more tears and kisses and
incoherent stammerings, and which Martin inferred to be her appeal
for forgiveness for the time she had lacked faith in him and
insisted on his getting a job.

"He can't never keep his money, that's sure," Hermann von Schmidt
confided to his wife. "He got mad when I spoke of interest, an' he
said damn the principal and if I mentioned it again, he'd punch my
Dutch head off. That's what he said - my Dutch head. But he's all
right, even if he ain't no business man. He's given me my chance,
an' he's all right."

Invitations to dinner poured in on Martin; and the more they
poured, the more he puzzled. He sat, the guest of honor, at an
Arden Club banquet, with men of note whom he had heard about and
read about all his life; and they told him how, when they had read
"The Ring of Bells" in the TRANSCONTINENTAL, and "The Peri and the
Pearl" in THE HORNET, they had immediately picked him for a winner.
My God! and I was hungry and in rags, he thought to himself. Why
didn't you give me a dinner then? Then was the time. It was work
performed. If you are feeding me now for work performed, why did
you not feed me then when I needed it? Not one word in "The Ring
of Bells," nor in "The Peri and the Pearl" has been changed. No;
you're not feeding me now for work performed. You are feeding me
because everybody else is feeding me and because it is an honor to
feed me. You are feeding me now because you are herd animals;
because you are part of the mob; because the one blind, automatic
thought in the mob-mind just now is to feed me. And where does
Martin Eden and the work Martin Eden performed come in in all this?
he asked himself plaintively, then arose to respond cleverly and
wittily to a clever and witty toast.

So it went. Wherever he happened to be - at the Press Club, at the
Redwood Club, at pink teas and literary gatherings - always were
remembered "The Ring of Bells" and "The Peri and the Pearl" when
they were first published. And always was Martin's maddening and
unuttered demand: Why didn't you feed me then? It was work
performed. "The Ring of Bells" and "The Peri and the Pearl" are
not changed one iota. They were just as artistic, just as worth
while, then as now. But you are not feeding me for their sake, nor
for the sake of anything else I have written. You're feeding me
because it is the style of feeding just now, because the whole mob
is crazy with the idea of feeding Martin Eden.

And often, at such times, he would abruptly see slouch in among the
company a young hoodlum in square-cut coat and under a stiff-rim
Stetson hat. It happened to him at the Gallina Society in Oakland
one afternoon. As he rose from his chair and stepped forward
across the platform, he saw stalk through the wide door at the rear
of the great room the young hoodlum with the square-cut coat and
stiff-rim hat. Five hundred fashionably gowned women turned their
heads, so intent and steadfast was Martin's gaze, to see what he
was seeing. But they saw only the empty centre aisle. He saw the
young tough lurching down that aisle and wondered if he would
remove the stiff-rim which never yet had he seen him without.
Straight down the aisle he came, and up the platform. Martin could
have wept over that youthful shade of himself, when he thought of
all that lay before him. Across the platform he swaggered, right
up to Martin, and into the foreground of Martin's consciousness
disappeared. The five hundred women applauded softly with gloved
hands, seeking to encourage the bashful great man who was their
guest. And Martin shook the vision from his brain, smiled, and
began to speak.

The Superintendent of Schools, good old man, stopped Martin on the
street and remembered him, recalling seances in his office when
Martin was expelled from school for fighting.

"I read your 'Ring of Bells' in one of the magazines quite a time
ago," he said. "It was as good as Poe. Splendid, I said at the
time, splendid!"

Yes, and twice in the months that followed you passed me on the
street and did not know me, Martin almost said aloud. Each time I
was hungry and heading for the pawnbroker. Yet it was work
performed. You did not know me then. Why do you know me now?

"I was remarking to my wife only the other day," the other was
saying, "wouldn't it be a good idea to have you out to dinner some
time? And she quite agreed with me. Yes, she quite agreed with
me."

"Dinner?" Martin said so sharply that it was almost a snarl.

"Why, yes, yes, dinner, you know - just pot luck with us, with your
old superintendent, you rascal," he uttered nervously, poking
Martin in an attempt at jocular fellowship.

Martin went down the street in a daze. He stopped at the corner
and looked about him vacantly.

"Well, I'll be damned!" he murmured at last. "The old fellow was
afraid of me."



CHAPTER XLV



Kreis came to Martin one day - Kreis, of the "real dirt"; and
Martin turned to him with relief, to receive the glowing details of
a scheme sufficiently wild-catty to interest him as a fictionist
rather than an investor. Kreis paused long enough in the midst of
his exposition to tell him that in most of his "Shame of the Sun"
he had been a chump.

"But I didn't come here to spout philosophy," Kreis went on. "What
I want to know is whether or not you will put a thousand dollars in
on this deal?"

"No, I'm not chump enough for that, at any rate," Martin answered.
"But I'll tell you what I will do. You gave me the greatest night
of my life. You gave me what money cannot buy. Now I've got
money, and it means nothing to me. I'd like to turn over to you a
thousand dollars of what I don't value for what you gave me that
night and which was beyond price. You need the money. I've got
more than I need. You want it. You came for it. There's no use
scheming it out of me. Take it."

Kreis betrayed no surprise. He folded the check away in his
pocket.

"At that rate I'd like the contract of providing you with many such
nights," he said.

"Too late." Martin shook his head. "That night was the one night
for me. I was in paradise. It's commonplace with you, I know.
But it wasn't to me. I shall never live at such a pitch again.
I'm done with philosophy. I want never to hear another word of
it."

"The first dollar I ever made in my life out of my philosophy,"
Kreis remarked, as he paused in the doorway. "And then the market
broke."

Mrs. Morse drove by Martin on the street one day, and smiled and
nodded. He smiled back and lifted his hat. The episode did not
affect him. A month before it might have disgusted him, or made
him curious and set him to speculating about her state of
consciousness at that moment. But now it was not provocative of a
second thought. He forgot about it the next moment. He forgot
about it as he would have forgotten the Central Bank Building or
the City Hall after having walked past them. Yet his mind was
preternaturally active. His thoughts went ever around and around
in a circle. The centre of that circle was "work performed"; it
ate at his brain like a deathless maggot. He awoke to it in the
morning. It tormented his dreams at night. Every affair of life
around him that penetrated through his senses immediately related
itself to "work performed." He drove along the path of relentless
logic to the conclusion that he was nobody, nothing. Mart Eden,
the hoodlum, and Mart Eden, the sailor, had been real, had been he;
but Martin Eden! the famous writer, did not exist. Martin Eden,
the famous writer, was a vapor that had arisen in the mob-mind and
by the mob-mind had been thrust into the corporeal being of Mart
Eden, the hoodlum and sailor. But it couldn't fool him. He was
not that sun-myth that the mob was worshipping and sacrificing
dinners to. He knew better.

He read the magazines about himself, and pored over portraits of
himself published therein until he was unable to associate his
identity with those portraits. He was the fellow who had lived and
thrilled and loved; who had been easy-going and tolerant of the
frailties of life; who had served in the forecastle, wandered in
strange lands, and led his gang in the old fighting days. He was
the fellow who had been stunned at first by the thousands of books
in the free library, and who had afterward learned his way among
them and mastered them; he was the fellow who had burned the
midnight oil and bedded with a spur and written books himself. But
the one thing he was not was that colossal appetite that all the
mob was bent upon feeding.

There were things, however, in the magazines that amused him. All
the magazines were claiming him. WARREN'S MONTHLY advertised to
its subscribers that it was always on the quest after new writers,
and that, among others, it had introduced Martin Eden to the
reading public. THE WHITE MOUSE claimed him; so did THE NORTHERN
REVIEW and MACKINTOSH'S MAGAZINE, until silenced by THE GLOBE,
which pointed triumphantly to its files where the mangled "Sea
Lyrics" lay buried. YOUTH AND AGE, which had come to life again
after having escaped paying its bills, put in a prior claim, which
nobody but farmers' children ever read. The TRANSCONTINENTAL made
a dignified and convincing statement of how it first discovered
Martin Eden, which was warmly disputed by THE HORNET, with the
exhibit of "The Peri and the Pearl." The modest claim of
Singletree, Darnley & Co. was lost in the din. Besides, that
publishing firm did not own a magazine wherewith to make its claim
less modest.

The newspapers calculated Martin's royalties. In some way the
magnificent offers certain magazines had made him leaked out, and
Oakland ministers called upon him in a friendly way, while
professional begging letters began to clutter his mail. But worse
than all this were the women. His photographs were published
broadcast, and special writers exploited his strong, bronzed face,
his scars, his heavy shoulders, his clear, quiet eyes, and the
slight hollows in his cheeks like an ascetic's. At this last he
remembered his wild youth and smiled. Often, among the women he
met, he would see now one, now another, looking at him, appraising
him, selecting him. He laughed to himself. He remembered
Brissenden's warning and laughed again. The women would never
destroy him, that much was certain. He had gone past that stage.

Once, walking with Lizzie toward night school, she caught a glance
directed toward him by a well-gowned, handsome woman of the
bourgeoisie. The glance was a trifle too long, a shade too
considerative. Lizzie knew it for what it was, and her body tensed
angrily. Martin noticed, noticed the cause of it, told her how
used he was becoming to it and that he did not care anyway.

"You ought to care," she answered with blazing eyes. "You're sick.
That's what's the matter."

"Never healthier in my life. I weigh five pounds more than I ever
did."

"It ain't your body. It's your head. Something's wrong with your
think-machine. Even I can see that, an' I ain't nobody."

He walked on beside her, reflecting.

"I'd give anything to see you get over it," she broke out
impulsively. "You ought to care when women look at you that way, a
man like you. It's not natural. It's all right enough for sissy-
boys. But you ain't made that way. So help me, I'd be willing an'
glad if the right woman came along an' made you care."

When he left Lizzie at night school, he returned to the Metropole.

Once in his rooms, he dropped into a Morris chair and sat staring
straight before him. He did not doze. Nor did he think. His mind
was a blank, save for the intervals when unsummoned memory pictures
took form and color and radiance just under his eyelids. He saw
these pictures, but he was scarcely conscious of them - no more so
than if they had been dreams. Yet he was not asleep. Once, he
roused himself and glanced at his watch. It was just eight
o'clock. He had nothing to do, and it was too early for bed. Then
his mind went blank again, and the pictures began to form and
vanish under his eyelids. There was nothing distinctive about the
pictures. They were always masses of leaves and shrub-like
branches shot through with hot sunshine.

A knock at the door aroused him. He was not asleep, and his mind
immediately connected the knock with a telegram, or letter, or
perhaps one of the servants bringing back clean clothes from the
laundry. He was thinking about Joe and wondering where he was, as
he said, "Come in."

He was still thinking about Joe, and did not turn toward the door.
He heard it close softly. There was a long silence. He forgot
that there had been a knock at the door, and was still staring
blankly before him when he heard a woman's sob. It was
involuntary, spasmodic, checked, and stifled - he noted that as he
turned about. The next instant he was on his feet.

"Ruth!" he said, amazed and bewildered.

Her face was white and strained. She stood just inside the door,
one hand against it for support, the other pressed to her side.
She extended both hands toward him piteously, and started forward
to meet him. As he caught her hands and led her to the Morris
chair he noticed how cold they were. He drew up another chair and
sat down on the broad arm of it. He was too confused to speak. In
his own mind his affair with Ruth was closed and sealed. He felt
much in the same way that he would have felt had the Shelly Hot
Springs Laundry suddenly invaded the Hotel Metropole with a whole
week's washing ready for him to pitch into. Several times he was
about to speak, and each time he hesitated.

"No one knows I am here," Ruth said in a faint voice, with an
appealing smile.

"What did you say?"

He was surprised at the sound of his own voice.

She repeated her words.

"Oh," he said, then wondered what more he could possibly say.

"I saw you come in, and I waited a few minutes."

"Oh," he said again.

He had never been so tongue-tied in his life. Positively he did
not have an idea in his head. He felt stupid and awkward, but for
the life of him he could think of nothing to say. It would have
been easier had the intrusion been the Shelly Hot Springs laundry.
He could have rolled up his sleeves and gone to work.

"And then you came in," he said finally.

She nodded, with a slightly arch expression, and loosened the scarf
at her throat.

"I saw you first from across the street when you were with that
girl."

"Oh, yes," he said simply. "I took her down to night school."

"Well, aren't you glad to see me?" she said at the end of another
silence.

"Yes, yes." He spoke hastily. "But wasn't it rash of you to come
here?"

"I slipped in. Nobody knows I am here. I wanted to see you. I
came to tell you I have been very foolish. I came because I could
no longer stay away, because my heart compelled me to come, because
- because I wanted to come."

She came forward, out of her chair and over to him. She rested her
hand on his shoulder a moment, breathing quickly, and then slipped
into his arms. And in his large, easy way, desirous of not
inflicting hurt, knowing that to repulse this proffer of herself
was to inflict the most grievous hurt a woman could receive, he
folded his arms around her and held her close. But there was no
warmth in the embrace, no caress in the contact. She had come into
his arms, and he held her, that was all. She nestled against him,
and then, with a change of position, her hands crept up and rested
upon his neck. But his flesh was not fire beneath those hands, and
he felt awkward and uncomfortable.

"What makes you tremble so?" he asked. "Is it a chill? Shall I
light the grate?"

He made a movement to disengage himself, but she clung more closely
to him, shivering violently.

"It is merely nervousness," she said with chattering teeth. "I'll
control myself in a minute. There, I am better already."

Slowly her shivering died away. He continued to hold her, but he
was no longer puzzled. He knew now for what she had come.

"My mother wanted me to marry Charley Hapgood," she announced.

"Charley Hapgood, that fellow who speaks always in platitudes?"
Martin groaned. Then he added, "And now, I suppose, your mother
wants you to marry me."

He did not put it in the form of a question. He stated it as a
certitude, and before his eyes began to dance the rows of figures
of his royalties.

"She will not object, I know that much," Ruth said.

"She considers me quite eligible?"

Ruth nodded.

"And yet I am not a bit more eligible now than I was when she broke
our engagement," he meditated. "I haven't changed any. I'm the
same Martin Eden, though for that matter I'm a bit worse - I smoke
now. Don't you smell my breath?"

In reply she pressed her open fingers against his lips, placed them
graciously and playfully, and in expectancy of the kiss that of old
had always been a consequence. But there was no caressing answer
of Martin's lips. He waited until the fingers were removed and
then went on.

"I am not changed. I haven't got a job. I'm not looking for a
job. Furthermore, I am not going to look for a job. And I still
believe that Herbert Spencer is a great and noble man and that
Judge Blount is an unmitigated ass. I had dinner with him the
other night, so I ought to know."

"But you didn't accept father's invitation," she chided.

"So you know about that? Who sent him? Your mother?"

She remained silent.

"Then she did send him. I thought so. And now I suppose she has
sent you."

"No one knows that I am here," she protested. "Do you think my
mother would permit this?"

"She'd permit you to marry me, that's certain."

She gave a sharp cry. "Oh, Martin, don't be cruel. You have not
kissed me once. You are as unresponsive as a stone. And think
what I have dared to do." She looked about her with a shiver,
though half the look was curiosity. "Just think of where I am."

"I COULD DIE FOR YOU! I COULD DIE FOR YOU!" - Lizzie's words were
ringing in his ears.

"Why didn't you dare it before?" he asked harshly. "When I hadn't
a job? When I was starving? When I was just as I am now, as a
man, as an artist, the same Martin Eden? That's the question I've
been propounding to myself for many a day - not concerning you
merely, but concerning everybody. You see I have not changed,
though my sudden apparent appreciation in value compels me
constantly to reassure myself on that point. I've got the same
flesh on my bones, the same ten fingers and toes. I am the same.
I have not developed any new strength nor virtue. My brain is the
same old brain. I haven't made even one new generalization on
literature or philosophy. I am personally of the same value that I
was when nobody wanted me. And what is puzzling me is why they
want me now. Surely they don't want me for myself, for myself is
the same old self they did not want. Then they must want me for
something else, for something that is outside of me, for something
that is not I! Shall I tell you what that something is? It is for
the recognition I have received. That recognition is not I. It
resides in the minds of others. Then again for the money I have
earned and am earning. But that money is not I. It resides in
banks and in the pockets of Tom, Dick, and Harry. And is it for
that, for the recognition and the money, that you now want me?"

"You are breaking my heart," she sobbed. "You know I love you,
that I am here because I love you."

"I am afraid you don't see my point," he said gently. "What I mean
is: if you love me, how does it happen that you love me now so
much more than you did when your love was weak enough to deny me?"

"Forget and forgive," she cried passionately. "I loved you all the
time, remember that, and I am here, now, in your arms."

"I'm afraid I am a shrewd merchant, peering into the scales, trying
to weigh your love and find out what manner of thing it is."

She withdrew herself from his arms, sat upright, and looked at him
long and searchingly. She was about to speak, then faltered and
changed her mind.

"You see, it appears this way to me," he went on. "When I was all
that I am now, nobody out of my own class seemed to care for me.
When my books were all written, no one who had read the manuscripts
seemed to care for them. In point of fact, because of the stuff I
had written they seemed to care even less for me. In writing the
stuff it seemed that I had committed acts that were, to say the
least, derogatory. 'Get a job,' everybody said."

She made a movement of dissent.

"Yes, yes," he said; "except in your case you told me to get a
position. The homely word JOB, like much that I have written,
offends you. It is brutal. But I assure you it was no less brutal
to me when everybody I knew recommended it to me as they would
recommend right conduct to an immoral creature. But to return.
The publication of what I had written, and the public notice I
received, wrought a change in the fibre of your love. Martin Eden,
with his work all performed, you would not marry. Your love for
him was not strong enough to enable you to marry him. But your
love is now strong enough, and I cannot avoid the conclusion that
its strength arises from the publication and the public notice. In
your case I do not mention royalties, though I am certain that they
apply to the change wrought in your mother and father. Of course,
all this is not flattering to me. But worst of all, it makes me
question love, sacred love. Is love so gross a thing that it must
feed upon publication and public notice? It would seem so. I have
sat and thought upon it till my head went around."

"Poor, dear head." She reached up a hand and passed the fingers
soothingly through his hair. "Let it go around no more. Let us
begin anew, now. I loved you all the time. I know that I was weak
in yielding to my mother's will. I should not have done so. Yet I
have heard you speak so often with broad charity of the fallibility
and frailty of humankind. Extend that charity to me. I acted
mistakenly. Forgive me."

"Oh, I do forgive," he said impatiently. "It is easy to forgive
where there is really nothing to forgive. Nothing that you have
done requires forgiveness. One acts according to one's lights, and
more than that one cannot do. As well might I ask you to forgive
me for my not getting a job."

"I meant well," she protested. "You know that I could not have
loved you and not meant well."

"True; but you would have destroyed me out of your well-meaning."

"Yes, yes," he shut off her attempted objection. "You would have
destroyed my writing and my career. Realism is imperative to my
nature, and the bourgeois spirit hates realism. The bourgeoisie is
cowardly. It is afraid of life. And all your effort was to make
me afraid of life. You would have formalized me. You would have
compressed me into a two-by-four pigeonhole of life, where all
life's values are unreal, and false, and vulgar." He felt her stir
protestingly. "Vulgarity - a hearty vulgarity, I'll admit - is the
basis of bourgeois refinement and culture. As I say, you wanted to
formalize me, to make me over into one of your own class, with your
class-ideals, class-values, and class-prejudices." He shook his
head sadly. "And you do not understand, even now, what I am
saying. My words do not mean to you what I endeavor to make them
mean. What I say is so much fantasy to you. Yet to me it is vital
reality. At the best you are a trifle puzzled and amused that this
raw boy, crawling up out of the mire of the abyss, should pass
judgment upon your class and call it vulgar."

She leaned her head wearily against his shoulder, and her body
shivered with recurrent nervousness. He waited for a time for her
to speak, and then went on.

"And now you want to renew our love. You want us to be married.
You want me. And yet, listen - if my books had not been noticed,
I'd nevertheless have been just what I am now. And you would have
stayed away. It is all those damned books - "

"Don't swear," she interrupted.

Her reproof startled him. He broke into a harsh laugh.

"That's it," he said, "at a high moment, when what seems your
life's happiness is at stake, you are afraid of life in the same
old way - afraid of life and a healthy oath."

She was stung by his words into realization of the puerility of her
act, and yet she felt that he had magnified it unduly and was
consequently resentful. They sat in silence for a long time, she
thinking desperately and he pondering upon his love which had
departed. He knew, now, that he had not really loved her. It was
an idealized Ruth he had loved, an ethereal creature of his own
creating, the bright and luminous spirit of his love-poems. The
real bourgeois Ruth, with all the bourgeois failings and with the
hopeless cramp of the bourgeois psychology in her mind, he had
never loved.

She suddenly began to speak.

"I know that much you have said is so. I have been afraid of life.
I did not love you well enough. I have learned to love better. I
love you for what you are, for what you were, for the ways even by
which you have become. I love you for the ways wherein you differ
from what you call my class, for your beliefs which I do not
understand but which I know I can come to understand. I shall
devote myself to understanding them. And even your smoking and
your swearing - they are part of you and I will love you for them,
too. I can still learn. In the last ten minutes I have learned
much. That I have dared to come here is a token of what I have
already learned. Oh, Martin! - "

She was sobbing and nestling close against him.

For the first time his arms folded her gently and with sympathy,
and she acknowledged it with a happy movement and a brightening
face.

"It is too late," he said. He remembered Lizzie's words. "I am a
sick man - oh, not my body. It is my soul, my brain. I seem to
have lost all values. I care for nothing. If you had been this
way a few months ago, it would have been different. It is too
late, now."

"It is not too late," she cried. "I will show you. I will prove
to you that my love has grown, that it is greater to me than my
class and all that is dearest to me. All that is dearest to the
bourgeoisie I will flout. I am no longer afraid of life. I will
leave my father and mother, and let my name become a by-word with
my friends. I will come to you here and now, in free love if you
will, and I will be proud and glad to be with you. If I have been
a traitor to love, I will now, for love's sake, be a traitor to all
that made that earlier treason."

She stood before him, with shining eyes.

"I am waiting, Martin," she whispered, "waiting for you to accept
me. Look at me."

It was splendid, he thought, looking at her. She had redeemed
herself for all that she had lacked, rising up at last, true woman,
superior to the iron rule of bourgeois convention. It was
splendid, magnificent, desperate. And yet, what was the matter
with him? He was not thrilled nor stirred by what she had done.
It was splendid and magnificent only intellectually. In what
should have been a moment of fire, he coldly appraised her. His
heart was untouched. He was unaware of any desire for her. Again
he remembered Lizzie's words.

"I am sick, very sick," he said with a despairing gesture. "How
sick I did not know till now. Something has gone out of me. I
have always been unafraid of life, but I never dreamed of being
sated with life. Life has so filled me that I am empty of any
desire for anything. If there were room, I should want you, now.
You see how sick I am."

He leaned his head back and closed his eyes; and like a child,
crying, that forgets its grief in watching the sunlight percolate
through the tear-dimmed films over the pupils, so Martin forgot his
sickness, the presence of Ruth, everything, in watching the masses
of vegetation, shot through hotly with sunshine that took form and
blazed against this background of his eyelids. It was not restful,
that green foliage. The sunlight was too raw and glaring. It hurt
him to look at it, and yet he looked, he knew not why.

He was brought back to himself by the rattle of the door-knob.
Ruth was at the door.

"How shall I get out?" she questioned tearfully. "I am afraid."

"Oh, forgive me," he cried, springing to his feet. "I'm not
myself, you know. I forgot you were here." He put his hand to his
head. "You see, I'm not just right. I'll take you home. We can
go out by the servants' entrance. No one will see us. Pull down
that veil and everything will be all right."

She clung to his arm through the dim-lighted passages and down the
narrow stairs.

"I am safe now," she said, when they emerged on the sidewalk, at
the same time starting to take her hand from his arm.

"No, no, I'll see you home," he answered.

"No, please don't," she objected. "It is unnecessary."

Again she started to remove her hand. He felt a momentary
curiosity. Now that she was out of danger she was afraid. She was
in almost a panic to be quit of him. He could see no reason for it
and attributed it to her nervousness. So he restrained her
withdrawing hand and started to walk on with her. Halfway down the
block, he saw a man in a long overcoat shrink back into a doorway.
He shot a glance in as he passed by, and, despite the high turned-
up collar, he was certain that he recognized Ruth's brother,
Norman.

During the walk Ruth and Martin held little conversation. She was
stunned. He was apathetic. Once, he mentioned that he was going
away, back to the South Seas, and, once, she asked him to forgive
her having come to him. And that was all. The parting at her door
was conventional. They shook hands, said good night, and he lifted
his hat. The door swung shut, and he lighted a cigarette and
turned back for his hotel. When he came to the doorway into which
he had seen Norman shrink, he stopped and looked in in a
speculative humor.

"She lied," he said aloud. "She made believe to me that she had
dared greatly, and all the while she knew the brother that brought
her was waiting to take her back." He burst into laughter. "Oh,
these bourgeois! When I was broke, I was not fit to be seen with
his sister. When I have a bank account, he brings her to me."

As he swung on his heel to go on, a tramp, going in the same
direction, begged him over his shoulder.

"Say, mister, can you give me a quarter to get a bed?" were the
words.

But it was the voice that made Martin turn around. The next
instant he had Joe by the hand.

"D'ye remember that time we parted at the Hot Springs?" the other
was saying. "I said then we'd meet again. I felt it in my bones.
An' here we are."

"You're looking good," Martin said admiringly, "and you've put on
weight."

"I sure have." Joe's face was beaming. "I never knew what it was
to live till I hit hoboin'. I'm thirty pounds heavier an' feel
tiptop all the time. Why, I was worked to skin an' bone in them
old days. Hoboin' sure agrees with me."

"But you're looking for a bed just the same," Martin chided, "and
it's a cold night."

"Huh? Lookin' for a bed?" Joe shot a hand into his hip pocket and
brought it out filled with small change. "That beats hard graft,"
he exulted. "You just looked good; that's why I battered you."

Martin laughed and gave in.

"You've several full-sized drunks right there," he insinuated.

Joe slid the money back into his pocket.

"Not in mine," he announced. "No gettin' oryide for me, though
there ain't nothin' to stop me except I don't want to. I've ben
drunk once since I seen you last, an' then it was unexpected, bein'
on an empty stomach. When I work like a beast, I drink like a
beast. When I live like a man, I drink like a man - a jolt now an'
again when I feel like it, an' that's all."

Martin arranged to meet him next day, and went on to the hotel. He
paused in the office to look up steamer sailings. The Mariposa
sailed for Tahiti in five days.

"Telephone over to-morrow and reserve a stateroom for me," he told
the clerk. "No deck-stateroom, but down below, on the weather-
side, - the port-side, remember that, the port-side. You'd better
write it down."

Once in his room he got into bed and slipped off to sleep as gently
as a child. The occurrences of the evening had made no impression
on him. His mind was dead to impressions. The glow of warmth with
which he met Joe had been most fleeting. The succeeding minute he
had been bothered by the ex-laundryman's presence and by the
compulsion of conversation. That in five more days he sailed for
his loved South Seas meant nothing to him. So he closed his eyes
and slept normally and comfortably for eight uninterrupted hours.
He was not restless. He did not change his position, nor did he
dream. Sleep had become to him oblivion, and each day that he
awoke, he awoke with regret. Life worried and bored him, and time
was a vexation.





"Say, Joe," was his greeting to his old-time working-mate next
morning, "there's a Frenchman out on Twenty-eighth Street. He's
made a pot of money, and he's going back to France. It's a dandy,
well-appointed, small steam laundry. There's a start for you if
you want to settle down. Here, take this; buy some clothes with it
and be at this man's office by ten o'clock. He looked up the
laundry for me, and he'll take you out and show you around. If you
like it, and think it is worth the price - twelve thousand - let me
know and it is yours. Now run along. I'm busy. I'll see you
later."

"Now look here, Mart," the other said slowly, with kindling anger,
"I come here this mornin' to see you. Savve? I didn't come here
to get no laundry. I come a here for a talk for old friends' sake,
and you shove a laundry at me. I tell you, what you can do. You
can take that laundry an' go to hell."

He was out of the room when Martin caught him and whirled him
around.

"Now look here, Joe," he said; "if you act that way, I'll punch
your head. An for old friends' sake I'll punch it hard. Savve? -
you will, will you?"

Joe had clinched and attempted to throw him, and he was twisting
and writhing out of the advantage of the other's hold. They reeled
about the room, locked in each other's arms, and came down with a
crash across the splintered wreckage of a wicker chair. Joe was
underneath, with arms spread out and held and with Martin's knee on
his chest. He was panting and gasping for breath when Martin
released him.

"Now we'll talk a moment," Martin said. "You can't get fresh with
me. I want that laundry business finished first of all. Then you
can come back and we'll talk for old sake's sake. I told you I was
busy. Look at that."

A servant had just come in with the morning mail, a great mass of
letters and magazines.

"How can I wade through that and talk with you? You go and fix up
that laundry, and then we'll get together."

"All right," Joe admitted reluctantly. "I thought you was turnin'
me down, but I guess I was mistaken. But you can't lick me, Mart,
in a stand-up fight. I've got the reach on you."

"We'll put on the gloves sometime and see," Martin said with a
smile.

"Sure; as soon as I get that laundry going." Joe extended his arm.
"You see that reach? It'll make you go a few."

Martin heaved a sigh of relief when the door closed behind the
laundryman. He was becoming anti-social. Daily he found it a
severer strain to be decent with people. Their presence perturbed
him, and the effort of conversation irritated him. They made him
restless, and no sooner was he in contact with them than he was
casting about for excuses to get rid of them.

He did not proceed to attack his mail, and for a half hour he
lolled in his chair, doing nothing, while no more than vague, half-
formed thoughts occasionally filtered through his intelligence, or
rather, at wide intervals, themselves constituted the flickering of
his intelligence.

He roused himself and began glancing through his mail. There were
a dozen requests for autographs - he knew them at sight; there were
professional begging letters; and there were letters from cranks,
ranging from the man with a working model of perpetual motion, and
the man who demonstrated that the surface of the earth was the
inside of a hollow sphere, to the man seeking financial aid to
purchase the Peninsula of Lower California for the purpose of
communist colonization. There were letters from women seeking to
know him, and over one such he smiled, for enclosed was her receipt
for pew-rent, sent as evidence of her good faith and as proof of
her respectability.

Editors and publishers contributed to the daily heap of letters,
the former on their knees for his manuscripts, the latter on their
knees for his books - his poor disdained manuscripts that had kept
all he possessed in pawn for so many dreary months in order to find
them in postage. There were unexpected checks for English serial
rights and for advance payments on foreign translations. His
English agent announced the sale of German translation rights in
three of his books, and informed him that Swedish editions, from
which he could expect nothing because Sweden was not a party to the
Berne Convention, were already on the market. Then there was a
nominal request for his permission for a Russian translation, that
country being likewise outside the Berne Convention.

He turned to the huge bundle of clippings which had come in from
his press bureau, and read about himself and his vogue, which had
become a furore. All his creative output had been flung to the
public in one magnificent sweep. That seemed to account for it.
He had taken the public off its feet, the way Kipling had, that
time when he lay near to death and all the mob, animated by a mob-
mind thought, began suddenly to read him. Martin remembered how
that same world-mob, having read him and acclaimed him and not
understood him in the least, had, abruptly, a few months later,
flung itself upon him and torn him to pieces. Martin grinned at
the thought. Who was he that he should not be similarly treated in
a few more months? Well, he would fool the mob. He would be away,
in the South Seas, building his grass house, trading for pearls and
copra, jumping reefs in frail outriggers, catching sharks and
bonitas, hunting wild goats among the cliffs of the valley that lay
next to the valley of Taiohae.

In the moment of that thought the desperateness of his situation
dawned upon him. He saw, cleared eyed, that he was in the Valley
of the Shadow. All the life that was in him was fading, fainting,
making toward death.

He realized how much he slept, and how much he desired to sleep.
Of old, he had hated sleep. It had robbed him of precious moments
of living. Four hours of sleep in the twenty-four had meant being
robbed of four hours of life. How he had grudged sleep! Now it
was life he grudged. Life was not good; its taste in his mouth was
without tang, and bitter. This was his peril. Life that did not
yearn toward life was in fair way toward ceasing. Some remote
instinct for preservation stirred in him, and he knew he must get
away. He glanced about the room, and the thought of packing was
burdensome. Perhaps it would be better to leave that to the last.
In the meantime he might be getting an outfit.

He put on his hat and went out, stopping in at a gun-store, where
he spent the remainder of the morning buying automatic rifles,
ammunition, and fishing tackle. Fashions changed in trading, and
he knew he would have to wait till he reached Tahiti before
ordering his trade-goods. They could come up from Australia,
anyway. This solution was a source of pleasure. He had avoided
doing something, and the doing of anything just now was unpleasant.
He went back to the hotel gladly, with a feeling of satisfaction in
that the comfortable Morris chair was waiting for him; and he
groaned inwardly, on entering his room, at sight of Joe in the
Morris chair.

Joe was delighted with the laundry. Everything was settled, and he
would enter into possession next day. Martin lay on the bed, with
closed eyes, while the other talked on. Martin's thoughts were far
away - so far away that he was rarely aware that he was thinking.
It was only by an effort that he occasionally responded. And yet
this was Joe, whom he had always liked. But Joe was too keen with
life. The boisterous impact of it on Martin's jaded mind was a
hurt. It was an aching probe to his tired sensitiveness. When Joe
reminded him that sometime in the future they were going to put on
the gloves together, he could almost have screamed.

"Remember, Joe, you're to run the laundry according to those old
rules you used to lay down at Shelly Hot Springs," he said. "No
overworking. No working at night. And no children at the mangles.
No children anywhere. And a fair wage."

Joe nodded and pulled out a note-book.

"Look at here. I was workin' out them rules before breakfast this
A.M. What d'ye think of them?"

He read them aloud, and Martin approved, worrying at the same time
as to when Joe would take himself off.

It was late afternoon when he awoke. Slowly the fact of life came
back to him. He glanced about the room. Joe had evidently stolen
away after he had dozed off. That was considerate of Joe, he
thought. Then he closed his eyes and slept again.

In the days that followed Joe was too busy organizing and taking
hold of the laundry to bother him much; and it was not until the
day before sailing that the newspapers made the announcement that
he had taken passage on the Mariposa. Once, when the instinct of
preservation fluttered, he went to a doctor and underwent a
searching physical examination. Nothing could be found the matter
with him. His heart and lungs were pronounced magnificent. Every
organ, so far as the doctor could know, was normal and was working
normally.

"There is nothing the matter with you, Mr. Eden," he said,
"positively nothing the matter with you. You are in the pink of
condition. Candidly, I envy you your health. It is superb. Look
at that chest. There, and in your stomach, lies the secret of your
remarkable constitution. Physically, you are a man in a thousand -
in ten thousand. Barring accidents, you should live to be a
hundred."

And Martin knew that Lizzie's diagnosis had been correct.
Physically he was all right. It was his "think-machine" that had
gone wrong, and there was no cure for that except to get away to
the South Seas. The trouble was that now, on the verge of
departure, he had no desire to go. The South Seas charmed him no
more than did bourgeois civilization. There was no zest in the
thought of departure, while the act of departure appalled him as a
weariness of the flesh. He would have felt better if he were
already on board and gone.

The last day was a sore trial. Having read of his sailing in the
morning papers, Bernard Higginbotham, Gertrude, and all the family
came to say good-by, as did Hermann von Schmidt and Marian. Then
there was business to be transacted, bills to be paid, and
everlasting reporters to be endured. He said good-by to Lizzie
Connolly, abruptly, at the entrance to night school, and hurried
away. At the hotel he found Joe, too busy all day with the laundry
to have come to him earlier. It was the last straw, but Martin
gripped the arms of his chair and talked and listened for half an
hour.

"You know, Joe," he said, "that you are not tied down to that
laundry. There are no strings on it. You can sell it any time and
blow the money. Any time you get sick of it and want to hit the
road, just pull out. Do what will make you the happiest."

Joe shook his head.

"No more road in mine, thank you kindly. Hoboin's all right,
exceptin' for one thing - the girls. I can't help it, but I'm a
ladies' man. I can't get along without 'em, and you've got to get
along without 'em when you're hoboin'. The times I've passed by
houses where dances an' parties was goin' on, an' heard the women
laugh, an' saw their white dresses and smiling faces through the
windows - Gee! I tell you them moments was plain hell. I like
dancin' an' picnics, an' walking in the moonlight, an' all the rest
too well. Me for the laundry, and a good front, with big iron
dollars clinkin' in my jeans. I seen a girl already, just
yesterday, and, d'ye know, I'm feelin' already I'd just as soon
marry her as not. I've ben whistlin' all day at the thought of it.
She's a beaut, with the kindest eyes and softest voice you ever
heard. Me for her, you can stack on that. Say, why don't you get
married with all this money to burn? You could get the finest girl
in the land."

Martin shook his head with a smile, but in his secret heart he was
wondering why any man wanted to marry. It seemed an amazing and
incomprehensible thing.

From the deck of the Mariposa, at the sailing hour, he saw Lizzie
Connolly hiding in the skirts of the crowd on the wharf. Take her
with you, came the thought. It is easy to be kind. She will be
supremely happy. It was almost a temptation one moment, and the
succeeding moment it became a terror. He was in a panic at the
thought of it. His tired soul cried out in protest. He turned
away from the rail with a groan, muttering, "Man, you are too sick,
you are too sick."

He fled to his stateroom, where he lurked until the steamer was
clear of the dock. In the dining saloon, at luncheon, he found
himself in the place of honor, at the captain's right; and he was
not long in discovering that he was the great man on board. But no
more unsatisfactory great man ever sailed on a ship. He spent the
afternoon in a deck-chair, with closed eyes, dozing brokenly most
of the time, and in the evening went early to bed.

After the second day, recovered from seasickness, the full
passenger list was in evidence, and the more he saw of the
passengers the more he disliked them. Yet he knew that he did them
injustice. They were good and kindly people, he forced himself to
acknowledge, and in the moment of acknowledgment he qualified -
good and kindly like all the bourgeoisie, with all the
psychological cramp and intellectual futility of their kind, they
bored him when they talked with him, their little superficial minds
were so filled with emptiness; while the boisterous high spirits
and the excessive energy of the younger people shocked him. They
were never quiet, ceaselessly playing deck-quoits, tossing rings,
promenading, or rushing to the rail with loud cries to watch the
leaping porpoises and the first schools of flying fish.

He slept much. After breakfast he sought his deck-chair with a
magazine he never finished. The printed pages tired him. He
puzzled that men found so much to write about, and, puzzling, dozed
in his chair. When the gong awoke him for luncheon, he was
irritated that he must awaken. There was no satisfaction in being
awake.

Once, he tried to arouse himself from his lethargy, and went
forward into the forecastle with the sailors. But the breed of
sailors seemed to have changed since the days he had lived in the
forecastle. He could find no kinship with these stolid-faced, ox-
minded bestial creatures. He was in despair. Up above nobody had
wanted Martin Eden for his own sake, and he could not go back to
those of his own class who had wanted him in the past. He did not
want them. He could not stand them any more than he could stand
the stupid first-cabin passengers and the riotous young people.

Life was to him like strong, white light that hurts the tired eyes
of a sick person. During every conscious moment life blazed in a
raw glare around him and upon him. It hurt. It hurt intolerably.
It was the first time in his life that Martin had travelled first
class. On ships at sea he had always been in the forecastle, the
steerage, or in the black depths of the coal-hold, passing coal.
In those days, climbing up the iron ladders out the pit of stifling
heat, he had often caught glimpses of the passengers, in cool
white, doing nothing but enjoy themselves, under awnings spread to
keep the sun and wind away from them, with subservient stewards
taking care of their every want and whim, and it had seemed to him
that the realm in which they moved and had their being was nothing
else than paradise. Well, here he was, the great man on board, in
the midmost centre of it, sitting at the captain's right hand, and
yet vainly harking back to forecastle and stoke-hole in quest of
the Paradise he had lost. He had found no new one, and now he
could not find the old one.

He strove to stir himself and find something to interest him. He
ventured the petty officers' mess, and was glad to get away. He
talked with a quartermaster off duty, an intelligent man who
promptly prodded him with the socialist propaganda and forced into
his hands a bunch of leaflets and pamphlets. He listened to the
man expounding the slave-morality, and as he listened, he thought
languidly of his own Nietzsche philosophy. But what was it worth,
after all? He remembered one of Nietzsche's mad utterances wherein
that madman had doubted truth. And who was to say? Perhaps
Nietzsche had been right. Perhaps there was no truth in anything,
no truth in truth - no such thing as truth. But his mind wearied
quickly, and he was content to go back to his chair and doze.

Miserable as he was on the steamer, a new misery came upon him.
What when the steamer reached Tahiti? He would have to go ashore.
He would have to order his trade-goods, to find a passage on a
schooner to the Marquesas, to do a thousand and one things that
were awful to contemplate. Whenever he steeled himself
deliberately to think, he could see the desperate peril in which he
stood. In all truth, he was in the Valley of the Shadow, and his
danger lay in that he was not afraid. If he were only afraid, he
would make toward life. Being unafraid, he was drifting deeper
into the shadow. He found no delight in the old familiar things of
life. The Mariposa was now in the northeast trades, and this wine
of wind, surging against him, irritated him. He had his chair
moved to escape the embrace of this lusty comrade of old days and
nights.

The day the Mariposa entered the doldrums, Martin was more
miserable than ever. He could no longer sleep. He was soaked with
sleep, and perforce he must now stay awake and endure the white
glare of life. He moved about restlessly. The air was sticky and
humid, and the rain-squalls were unrefreshing. He ached with life.
He walked around the deck until that hurt too much, then sat in his
chair until he was compelled to walk again. He forced himself at
last to finish the magazine, and from the steamer library he culled
several volumes of poetry. But they could not hold him, and once
more he took to walking.

He stayed late on deck, after dinner, but that did not help him,
for when he went below, he could not sleep. This surcease from
life had failed him. It was too much. He turned on the electric
light and tried to read. One of the volumes was a Swinburne. He
lay in bed, glancing through its pages, until suddenly he became
aware that he was reading with interest. He finished the stanza,
attempted to read on, then came back to it. He rested the book
face downward on his breast and fell to thinking. That was it.
The very thing. Strange that it had never come to him before.
That was the meaning of it all; he had been drifting that way all
the time, and now Swinburne showed him that it was the happy way
out. He wanted rest, and here was rest awaiting him. He glanced
at the open port-hole. Yes, it was large enough. For the first
time in weeks he felt happy. At last he had discovered the cure of
his ill. He picked up the book and read the stanza slowly aloud:-


From too much love of living,
From hope and fear set free,
We thank with brief thanksgiving
Whatever gods may be
That no life lives forever;
That dead men rise up never;
That even the weariest river
Winds somewhere safe to sea.


He looked again at the open port. Swinburne had furnished the key.
Life was ill, or, rather, it had become ill - an unbearable thing.
"That dead men rise up never!" That line stirred him with a
profound feeling of gratitude. It was the one beneficent thing in
the universe. When life became an aching weariness, death was
ready to soothe away to everlasting sleep. But what was he waiting
for? It was time to go.

He arose and thrust his head out the port-hole, looking down into
the milky wash. The Mariposa was deeply loaded, and, hanging by
his hands, his feet would be in the water. He could slip in
noiselessly. No one would hear. A smother of spray dashed up,
wetting his face. It tasted salt on his lips, and the taste was
good. He wondered if he ought to write a swan-song, but laughed
the thought away. There was no time. He was too impatient to be
gone.

Turning off the light in his room so that it might not betray him,
he went out the port-hole feet first. His shoulders stuck, and he
forced himself back so as to try it with one arm down by his side.
A roll of the steamer aided him, and he was through, hanging by his
hands. When his feet touched the sea, he let go. He was in a
milky froth of water. The side of the Mariposa rushed past him
like a dark wall, broken here and there by lighted ports. She was
certainly making time. Almost before he knew it, he was astern,
swimming gently on the foam-crackling surface.

A bonita struck at his white body, and he laughed aloud. It had
taken a piece out, and the sting of it reminded him of why he was
there. In the work to do he had forgotten the purpose of it. The
lights of the Mariposa were growing dim in the distance, and there
he was, swimming confidently, as though it were his intention to
make for the nearest land a thousand miles or so away.

It was the automatic instinct to live. He ceased swimming, but the
moment he felt the water rising above his mouth the hands struck
out sharply with a lifting movement. The will to live, was his
thought, and the thought was accompanied by a sneer. Well, he had
will, - ay, will strong enough that with one last exertion it could
destroy itself and cease to be.

He changed his position to a vertical one. He glanced up at the
quiet stars, at the same time emptying his lungs of air. With
swift, vigorous propulsion of hands and feet, he lifted his
shoulders and half his chest out of water. This was to gain
impetus for the descent. Then he let himself go and sank without
movement, a white statue, into the sea. He breathed in the water
deeply, deliberately, after the manner of a man taking an
anaesthetic. When he strangled, quite involuntarily his arms and
legs clawed the water and drove him up to the surface and into the
clear sight of the stars.

The will to live, he thought disdainfully, vainly endeavoring not
to breathe the air into his bursting lungs. Well, he would have to
try a new way. He filled his lungs with air, filled them full.
This supply would take him far down. He turned over and went down
head first, swimming with all his strength and all his will.
Deeper and deeper he went. His eyes were open, and he watched the
ghostly, phosphorescent trails of the darting bonita. As he swam,
he hoped that they would not strike at him, for it might snap the
tension of his will. But they did not strike, and he found time to
be grateful for this last kindness of life.

Down, down, he swam till his arms and leg grew tired and hardly
moved. He knew that he was deep. The pressure on his ear-drums
was a pain, and there was a buzzing in his head. His endurance was
faltering, but he compelled his arms and legs to drive him deeper
until his will snapped and the air drove from his lungs in a great
explosive rush. The bubbles rubbed and bounded like tiny balloons
against his cheeks and eyes as they took their upward flight. Then
came pain and strangulation. This hurt was not death, was the
thought that oscillated through his reeling consciousness. Death
did not hurt. It was life, the pangs of life, this awful,
suffocating feeling; it was the last blow life could deal him.

His wilful hands and feet began to beat and churn about,
spasmodically and feebly. But he had fooled them and the will to
live that made them beat and churn. He was too deep down. They
could never bring him to the surface. He seemed floating languidly
in a sea of dreamy vision. Colors and radiances surrounded him and
bathed him and pervaded him. What was that? It seemed a
lighthouse; but it was inside his brain - a flashing, bright white
light. It flashed swifter and swifter. There was a long rumble of
sound, and it seemed to him that he was falling down a vast and
interminable stairway. And somewhere at the bottom he fell into
darkness. That much he knew. He had fallen into darkness. And at
the instant he knew, he ceased to know.




